SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/dorkie

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA What do you get when you cross the daringDachshundwith the tenaciousYorkshire Terrier? A pint-sized dog with a big-dog attitude and bark: the Dorkie. The Dorkie dog isn’t recognized as an official American Kennel Club breed, so there’s no set breed standard describing its appearance or temperament. However, the two parent breeds are well established and provide a helpful framework for interested pet parents. You certainly wouldn’t think it by looking at them, but both Doxies and Yorkies started out as hunters, not lap warmers. Their sausagelike appearance may make you chuckle, but Dachshunds were designed for the serious task of subterranean tunneling in search of badgers. The lusciously locked Yorkshire Terrier, on the other hand, worked in rat extermination in textile mills and coal mines, their tiny size making them ideal for navigating rodent routes. As descendants of these compact, confident breeds, Dachshund-Yorkie mixes are similarly small, smart, and feisty. And yet withproper socialization, training, anddaily exercise, these hardworking hunters will be very happy to play the part of a lovable lap dog. Despite their rugged ancestry, Dorkies are decidedly indoor dogs. They’re far too social to enjoy being on their own most of the day, and theyaren’t well-suited to cold weather. You don’t need to employ them as ratters or badger trackers to keep them happy, but Dorkie dogs do need daily exercise—partly for their mental health, and also because both parent breeds areprone to obesity. And if they take after their Dachshund parent’s build, developing protective back muscles is particularly important to prevent injury. All outdoor exercise should bedone on a leashor within a fenced area. In addition to having ahigh prey drive, Yorkie-Dachshund mixes have a keen sense of smell that can lead them to follow their noses into danger. And if Dorkies find danger, their feisty spirit can result in rash decisions. Dorkies are happy to make friends with everyone—young and old, family and strangers, humans and pets. However, their size makes them vulnerable to injury around very small children who could mistake them for a toy. And, conversely, their feistiness can be too much for young kids. With their silky, floor-length, human-like hair, Yorkies have high grooming needs. Dachshunds, on the other hand—regardless of whether they’re smooth, wirehaired, or longhaired—typically require far less daily hair care. Thus, their Dorkie puppies will likely need a grooming routine that falls somewhere in between. Both Doxies and Yorkies are relativelyhealthy dog breedswith average lifespans of 12–16 years and 11–15 years, respectively, so expect a Dorkie lifespan to fall within this range. However, like all breeds, Dorkies are genetically predisposed to certain health issues. Dachshunds are predisposed tointervertebral disc disease (IVDD), which describes when one or more spinal discs (the padding between the bones of the spinal column) rupture, slip, or bulge. This condition can cause pain, nerve damage, and paralysis. Mild cases can be treated with rest, medication, andphysical therapy. Severe cases of IVDD may require surgery. Bloatin dogs is when gas and food cause the stomach to expand. Bloat sometimes progresses into a condition calledgastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV), when the dog’s stomach twists and cuts off blood flow to and from the stomach and the spleen. GDV is a painful, life-threatening emergency. It’s more common in deep-chested breeds like Dachshunds, so Dorkies may develop bloat and GDV as well. Be alert for the signs of bloat, including: Retching or dry heaving without vomiting Swollen abdomen Sudden anxiety, pacing, or inability to get comfortable Excessive panting and drooling Collapse If you notice any of these symptoms in your Dorkie, seek emergency veterinary care immediately. The trachea (windpipe) is a tube consisting of C-shaped rings of cartilage covered with a thin membrane that carries air from the mouth and nose to the lungs. Tracheal collapseis when the cartilage weakens or the membrane stretches out, causing the trachea’s shape to flatten. Medication is typically enough to help most dogs with tracheal collapse if they have clinical signs, but some may require surgery. Yorkies are particularly at risk for this condition. The most common sign of tracheal collapse in dogs is a cough that sounds like a goose honk during exercise, excitement, when eating or drinking, and in extreme heat and humidity. Yorkies are predisposed toliver shuntsand may pass the risk down to their Dorkie puppies. A liver shunt describes a blood vessel that connects blood from the digestive tract directly to the circulatory system, without properly going through the liver first. This blood—which contains nutrients, hormones, and waste material—therefore skips the vital detoxification process that happens in the liver. Treatment depends on the severity of the condition. Some dogs might need surgery, while others require medical management, such as medication and a diet change. When the patella (kneecap) moves outside its normal groove within the femur (thigh bone), this is calledpatellar luxation. The condition is more common in smaller breeds like Dachshunds and Yorkies. This may cause a dog to limp or walk in a bunny-hop gait. Patella luxation might not cause a significant issue in some dogs, but severe cases may require surgery. Periodontal disease, or gum disease, is a progressive condition in which bacteria accumulate in the mouth, causing damage to the dog’s gums, teeth, jaw bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs,small dogslike Dachshunds and Yorkshire Terriers are especially prone to the problem. Brushing your dog’s teethevery day is the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Work with your veterinarian to choose thebest dog foodfor your Dorkie. They will help you find a food that: MeetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards Contains the nutrients your dog needs according to their lifestyle, size, and health Is formulated for your dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult,senior) Most adult Dorkies should eat two meals a day—once in the morning and again in the evening. Dorkie puppies, however, have a higher metabolism and may need up to four meals a day to avoidhypoglycemia(low blood sugar). Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your Dorkie. To determinehow much to feed your Dorkie, start by looking at the nutrition label on your dog’s food bag. This provides a general idea of how many calories your Dorkie needs based on their weight. Then, talk to your veterinarian. They can make a personalized recommendation based on your pup’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Know that treats add up quickly, especially in small dogs. Dorkies are prone to obesity, so be sure treats never make up more than 10% of your dog’s daily diet. If your Dorkie is eating a food that meets AAFCO standards, they shouldn’t need extra nutrients. However, your veterinarian may recommend nutritional supplements to treat or prevent certain health issues your Dorkie may develop or be at risk for. For example, if your dog is diagnosed with patellar luxation, your vet may recommend ajoint supplement. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. The classic “little dog, big personality” stereotype rings true for the Dorkie. Despite being less than a foot high, their spunk and tenacity are off the charts. With parent breeds who were bred to work, Dorkies won’t want to spend all day lazing about. Daily exercise is necessary for their physical andmental health, but they’ll be happy to snuggle when they’re tired. The Dorkie’s big personality doesn’t just include attitude. They’re also incredibly affectionate, playful dogs who can do well with adults, children, and other pets. However, interactions between Dorkies and very young children should be closely monitored for the safety of both dog and child. Consistenttraining can help reduce barking, but prospective pet parents should be prepared for a talkative companion. Speaking of companionship, Dorkies are social dogs who need plenty of attention, play, and exercise each day. Bored, lonely Dorkies with energy to burn are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors, likediggingandexcessive barking. Descended from parents bred for hunting, Dorkies have a high prey drive and incredible noses. Thus, all outdoor exercise should be done either on a leash or within a securely fenced area. One of the most important things you can do when bringing home a Dorkie puppy is expose them to new animals, people, environments, activities, and objects during their first 16 weeks of life. Socializing your puppy can help them feel more comfortable in a wide variety of settings as they grow. Dorkies aresmart dogswho can learn quickly, but they can also be independent and opinionated when it comes to training. As with all dogs, apatient, positive, rewards-based training approachis best for teaching your dog new skills, providing mental stimulation, andstrengthening the human-animal bond. Walks Fetch Nose work Agility Puzzles Obedience training Skills training Your Dorkie’s Dachshund parent will have one of three coats—smooth, longhaired, or wirehaired—and each coat has its own grooming needs. Yorkies, on the other hand, have silky floor-length fur that needs to be brushed every day. The exact coat your dog inherits (and its associated grooming needs) will depend on your Dorkie’s parents. However, regardless of which parent your Dorkie favors, expect little shedding. Keeping your Dorkie’s coat healthy is key to keeping their skin healthy. Tangles and mattingcan keep moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your dog’s skin, causing irritation,infection, and other problems. Talk to your veterinarian abouthow often you should bathe your dog. Keep in mind that bathing your pup too often can strip their skin of healthy oils, causingdry and itchy skin. How often you need tobrush your dogdepends on their coat type. Longer, thicker fur is more prone to matting and needs to be brushed more regularly. Regular trips to the groomer can make your at-home job easier. Dorkies can be prone to eye issues. Schedule a vet appointment if you notice signs of disease, likerednessordischarge. Depending on your Dorkie’s coat type, you may need to trim the hair around their eyes to help avoid eye irritation. Ask your veterinarian for tips onhow to safely clean your dog’s ears. If you notice signs of anear infection, it’s time to make a vet appointment. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Dorkie puppy to your family: Do I live in a home where lots of barking would be OK? Can I provide regular grooming if needed? Can I brush a dog’s teeth every day? Am I home enough to give a dog companionship? Do I have time to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise every day? Can I keep a dog safely contained when exercising outdoors? Do I have the skills and patience to train a dog using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 16 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Dorkie. Dorkies are sweet, smart, spunky dogs who perfectly fit the “small dog, big personality” stereotype. They need families who can provide them with an indoor home, daily exercise, and plenty of attention. And in return, they will provide their family with lots of love and fun. The typical Dorkie lifespan falls within 11–15 years. Dorkies don’t shed very much, which can be beneficial to some people with allergies. However,no dog is truly hypoallergenic. Spend time around Dorkies before bringing home a puppy to ensure they don’t trigger your allergies. Featured Image: Courtesy of @pablo_of_bisbee/Instagram WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians