SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/general-health/dog-skin-allergies

Oksana Restenko/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  If your dog is scratching themselves more often than normal and you notice red, inflamed or irritated skin, it’s time to investigate the source of the itching. Skin allergies in dogs could be the culprit. Skin allergies are the most common type ofallergies in dogsand are triggered by environmental allergens, flea bites, food ingredients, or direct contact irritants. It’s important to identify the cause of a dog’s skin allergies with the help of a veterinarian. Once you know what’s going on, your vet can start treatment immediately. Skin allergies in dogs can appear in many different ways, some in specific locations of the body, or sometimes all over the skin. It’s important to work with your vet to determine the underlying cause of your pet’s skin allergies in order to develop the best treatment plan. The most common types of skin allergies in dogs are: Also known as environmental allergies, atopic dermatitis or atopy, this type of skin allergy is caused by an allergic reaction to triggers likeplant pollen, dust mites, mold spores, or other environmental allergens. This may happen more during seasonal changes, known asseasonal allergies. The most common symptom is profound itchiness of the face, ears, paws, armpits, and abdomen. Medications, likeZenrelia, may be prescribed to control the itching and skin inflammation. Acontact dermatitis allergyoccurs when your dog's skin comes into direct contact with irritants—like certain plants, chemicals, cleansers, caustic materials, or even things like dog shampoo—leading to localized itching and inflammation. Eliminating the allergen source will usually resolve skin allergy symptoms. Dogs withflea allergy dermatitisare hypersensitive to flea saliva, and even a single flea bite can trigger intense itching and skin irritation. Staying proactive onflea control preventive medicationis critical to a dog’s health to not only prevent skin allergies, if they have FAD, but also to protect them from the diseases fleas can carry. While certain proteins like chicken, beef, and pork in your dog's diet can cause an allergic reaction, food allergies in dogs can be from other ingredients as well. Food allergies can result in skin problems, such as itching, redness, and a rash. In dogs, it can be difficult to determine the exact source of thefood allergy, so your vet will likely recommend a veterinary diet withlimited ingredientsor made fromhydrolyzed protein. In the video below, veterinarians Jess Stroble, DVM, and Benjamin Carter, DVM, discuss the causes of allergies in dogs, as well the signs your dog has an allergy and how you can help. When dogs have skin allergies, pet parents may notice various symptoms, including: Veterinarians diagnose skin allergies by examining your dog’s skin and coat for signs of irritation and evaluating the pattern of itching. They often perform skin tests such as cytology or skin scrapings to rule out parasites and secondary infections. Environmental allergies (atopic dermatitis) are diagnosed based on history, clinical signs, and ruling out other causes like fleas or food allergies. Allergy testing does not diagnose atopy, but it can help identify specific allergens for immunotherapy treatment (more on that below). Intradermal skin testing, typically performed by a veterinary dermatologist, is considered the gold standard for allergen identification. Blood (serum IgE) testing may also be used, but hair and saliva tests are not considered reliable. Once a diagnosis is confirmed, a treatment plan may include: Your vet may prescribe medications to treat itching, inflammation, and/or infections. Common medications to treat dog skin allergies include: Zenrelia(ilunocitinib; JAK inhibitor) is an immune-modulating allergy medication for dogs that helps to break the itch-scratch cycle. It works well for both allergic dermatitis and atopic dermatitis in dogs over 12 months of age. The tablet is easy to give once a day, safe for dogs, and helps to reduce inflammation and improve skin allergy symptoms. Zenrelia can be given both short- or long-term to help with a dog’s skin allergies. Cytopointis a monoclonal antibody injection used to relieve itchy dogs that have atopic dermatitis. This injection is given by your vet every 4–8 weeks long-term for maximal effect. Antibiotics and antifungal medicationsare used to treatskin infections. They can be oral medications, or topical applications like medicated shampoo and medicated mousse. These products help to remove excess bacteria and yeast on the skin that cause skin infections. Steroids,such asprednisone, can be prescribed by your vet to help with inflammation and to help decrease the activity of the immune system caused by a skin allergy. Steroids can also be found in topical treatments like ointments and ear medication. Antihistaminesare not the most effective treatment for skin allergies in dogs, but they can be helpful for some cases of atopic dermatitis. Cetirizine (Zyrtec) and loratadine (Claritin) are antihistamines that might be recommended by your veterinarian for your dog’s skin allergies. Medicated shampoos can help with many different symptoms of skin allergies in dogs. They contain ingredients to soothe, hydrate, and relieve itch. Shampoos with antimicrobial action help with skin infections while those with steroids can help with inflammation and itch. Medicated dog shampoosare a great adjunct therapy for most skin allergies, including contact dermatitis, as they remove the stimulus from the skin that is triggering the itch. Topical sprays and mousse can help with skin infections from itchy allergies. An anti-itch spray can help reduce your dog’s itch sensation and urge to scratch, which in turn prevents further damage to the skin. Flea and tick preventionis essential for all dogs but especially those that have skin allergies. Flea allergic dermatitis requires very strict flea control of all pets in the home and the environment to prevent skin disease from skin allergies. If your vet suspects your dog has food allergies, then a novel protein, limited-ingredient hypoallergenic diet, or a hydrolyzed-protein diet will be recommended. A food trial takes at least 8–12 weeks, and be sure not to give any other treats, table scraps, chewable medications with meat proteins, or dog food during the trial, as these will interfere. Immunotherapy uses both allergy shots or allergy oral drops that are specifically formulated for your dog’s allergies based on intradermal skin testing. Intradermal skin testing uses tiny needles to inject environmental allergens into the dog’s skin in specific locations. These sites are then monitored over time to see if a skin reaction forms. This form of allergy testing is done by a veterinary dermatologist. To keep your dog itch-free, there are several preventive measures you can follow: While these steps can significantly reduce flare-ups, many dogs with allergic dermatitis require long-term management with veterinary guidance. Allergies don’t usually resolve spontaneously, though seasonal signs may fluctuate. Secondary skin infections can occur if allergies are untreated, and your dog’s allergies may become more severe over time. If you suspect your pet is experiencing allergies, talk with your veterinarian. Some dog breeds may be more prone to skin allergies, such asEnglish Bulldogs,Boxers, andLabrador Retrievers, due to their genetics and skin characteristics. But any dog can develop allergies. The most common type of skin allergy in dogs is atopic dermatitis (atopy) or environmental allergies, followed by flea allergy dermatitis and lastly food allergies. Atopy may occur only during specific seasons (seasonal), persist year-round (nonseasonal), or be present year-round with worsening symptoms during certain seasons (nonseasonal with seasonal flares). Common environmental allergens in dogs include pollen from trees (oak, cedar, etc. ), grass, and ragweed, plus dust mites, mold, and mildew. If your dog’s itching disrupts sleep, causes sores, or leads to hair loss, consult your veterinarian promptly. Early intervention prevents complications. Dog skin allergies usually can’t be cured, but they can be very well managed. Most allergies are lifelong sensitivities, meaning your dog’s immune system will always react to certain triggers like pollen, fleas, or specific foods. The good news is that with the right treatment plan—such as medications, special diets, flea prevention, or allergy therapy—most dogs can stay comfortable and live happy, itch-free lives. Your veterinarian can help create a plan tailored to your dog’s specific needs. Georgina Ushi completed her undergraduate education at Xavier University of Louisiana in New Orleans, where she earned a Bachelor of. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians