SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/mountain-cur

The Mountain Cur is a breed as rugged as the terrain it was bred to navigate. Originating in the United States, the Mountain Cur was the pioneer’s best friend, helping to hunt game and guard the homestead. Frontiersman Daniel Boonerelied on his Mountain Curswhile exploring the Appalachian Mountains. This breed is a medium-size dog, typically weighing 30–60 pounds and standing 16–26 inches tall. Their coat comes in a variety of colors, but the brindle Mountain Cur, with its unique striped pattern, is beloved and particularly striking. Mountain Curs are known for their intelligence, tenacity, and high energy levels. Thanks to their history of working side-by-side with pioneers, they have a strong work ethic and thrive when given a job to do. Their short, dense coat requires minimal grooming, making them a relatively low-maintenance breed. However, their high energy levels mean they need regular exerciseand mental stimulationto keep them happy and healthy. Mountain Cur dogs do best in a home with an active, outdoorsy family who spends their weekendshiking, hunting, or just hanging out in their fenced-in yard. Mountain Curs tend to behealthy dogsand regularly live 10–13 years, which istypical for a medium-sized dog. But like most breeds, Mountain Curs can be predisposed to certain health conditions. Hip dysplasia is a common genetic disorderthat can affect Mountain Curs. This condition, where the hip joint doesn’t fit snugly into the hip socket, causes discomfort and mobility issues. If left untreated, hip dysplasia can causearthritis in dogs. Treatment may vary depending on the severity of the disease—mild cases can be managed with pain medication andjoint supplements, while surgery might be recommended in severe cases. Helping yourdog maintain a healthy weightcan also help manage this condition. Mountain Cur dogs have floppy ears. And, like all other breeds with long, folded-over ears, they can bepredisposed to ear infectionsbecause the ear’s anatomy causes moisture and debris to become trapped. Clean your dog’s ears regularlywith avet-approved cleanerto prevent infections. If you notice any redness, odor, or discharge in your Mountain Cur’s ears, take them to the vet for an exam. To support their high energy levels, Mountain Curs need awell-balanced dietthat’s rich in protein. High-quality commercial dog food that’s formulated for active breeds and meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)is typically a good choice. Talk to your vet tofind the best dog foodthat meets your Mountain Cur’s needs. To maintain their energy levels, Mountain Curs should be fed two meals a day, typically one in the morning and one in the evening. Mountain Cur puppies need to follow amore frequent meal schedule, eating three or four times every day. How much food a Mountain Cur needs depends on your specific dog’s age, size, activity level, and health history. Your dog food’s packaging will provide guidance on portion sizes based on your dog’s desired weight, but talking to your veterinarian will give you the most accurate feeding instructions. Supplements such as glucosamine can support a Mountain Cur’s joint health, which is particularly important given their active nature or for those with hip dysplasia. It’s best to consult with your veterinarian before introducing any supplements to your dog’s diet. Mountain Curs aresmart dogsknown for their loyalty, making them exceptional hunting companions. They are high-energy dogs that require ample regular exercise and mental stimulation to prevent undesired behaviors from forming. At home, they are well-natured and generally good with children and other pets, especially when they’re socialized as puppies. Because of their history as pioneer dogs, Mountain Curs are alert. They can beprone to barking, especially if they think anything is amiss—even if that’s just a delivery person approaching your home. Socializing your Mountain Cur puppy early and consistently is important to help your pup learn that new people and experiences don’t have to be intimidating. Due to their intelligence and eagerness to please, training Mountain Curs can be fun and easy. Keep training sessions fun and, as with all dogs, always usepositive reinforcement training techniques. Tracking games Hiking Fetch Agility training Hunting Mountain Curs have a short, dense coat that doesn’t require a lot of fuss. Though they’re moderate shedders, Mountain Cur dogs are relatively low-maintenance when it comes to grooming. Outdoorsy Mountain Curs can get dirty and smelly, somonthly baths may be necessary. Use aveterinary-approved dog shampooto help maintain the health of your dog’s skin and coat. Because their coat is so short, you should only need to brush your Mountain Cur once a week to get rid of any loose hair. Brushing your dog will also distribute their natural oils throughout their hair, and it’s good bonding time, too. While Mountain Curs don’t require any special eye care, pet parents should monitor their dog’s eyes. Any changes, such asrednessordischarge, warrant a trip to the vet. Mountain Curs can be prone to ear infections. Cleaning their ears regularly with a veterinary-approved ear cleaner is important for maintaining the health of your dog’s ear canals. Mountain Curs are well-loved family dogs who thrive in the right environment, getting along great with kids and other dogs. Their high energy levels make them best suited for an active family where ample exercise and mental stimulation will be provided. However, apartment living is not ideal for this breed due to their energy requirements and tendency to bark. Mountain Curs are known for their loyalty, making them great family dogs. Despite their popularity as pioneer dogs, Mountain Curs are not commonly seen in the United States and are considered by many to be a rare breed. A Mountain Cur is a type of working dog that was bred for hunting and guarding. They are known for their intelligence, loyalty, and high energy. Featured Image: iStock/Alex Potemkin WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Teresa Kho-Pelfrey graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2015 and completed her clinical year at Purdue. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians