SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/newfoundland

SvetaElfimova/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images Newfoundlands, affectionately known as Newfies, are not only one of thebiggest dog breeds, but they’re also one of the most docile and friendly. The breed originated in Newfoundland, Canada, where the dogs worked alongside fishermen and served as water rescue dogs. Because of this history,Newfoundlands are natural swimmers—their webbed paws allow them to cut through water, and their thick coat insulates them from frigid temperatures. You can still find working Newfoundland dogs today, but they also make a great family pet for those with enough space to house this gentle giant. At 100–150 pounds, a full-grown Newfoundland dog weighs as much as some humans. They also stand about 26–28 inches tall at the shoulder, have a thick double coat that sheds year-round, and tend to drool. Put all this together and you have a supersized dog that needs consistent upkeep. For pet parents dedicated tobrushing their dogand wiping away drool, Newfoundlands reward you with their sweet temperament. Thesefriendly dogshave a reputation for being calm at home, patient around children, and good roommates to other dogs and cats. The average Newfoundland dog lifespan is 9–10 years. While they’re a generally healthy breed, the Newfoundland’s size and genetics makes them susceptible to certain health conditions pet parents need to be aware of. Gastric dilatation-volvulus, a severe form ofbloat in dogs, isa condition that occurs suddenly and requires immediate life-saving veterinary attention. GDV happens when the stomach fills up with food or gas, causing the stomach to expand. The stomach can then rotate, which causes inadequate blood supply to the spleen and stomach. Symptoms include: Non-productive retching Swollen abdomen Pacing and an inability to settle Excessive drooling Collapse Without quick veterinary care, a dog can experience shock, tissue damage, and even death. Take your Newfoundland to the nearest emergency vet immediately if you notice any symptoms of bloat and GDV. The longer a dog has this condition without intervention, the greater the risk of death. Increased risk is seen in older dogs with a deep chest, like the Newfoundland. To prevent GDV, agastropexy procedurecan secure the stomach to prevent it from twisting. This is often done at the same time as thedog’s spayorneuter surgery. Osteosarcomais an aggressive bone cancer Newfoundland dogs are predisposed to. This is the most common type of bone tumor found in dogs, especially larger breeds like Newfies. The first symptom that is noted is usuallylameness or limping, and a vet will take X-rays to diagnose osteosarcoma. Treatment often includespain control,amputation, andchemotherapy. Hip dysplasiais a condition where the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, causing a loose joint. This can be influenced by growth rate, hormones, or diet, and it can lead to degenerative joint disease andosteoarthritis. This arthritis leads to pain, limping, and difficulty standing. Maintaining a lean body conditionis important for preventing arthritis. Many vets recommend low-intensity exercise,omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil), andjoint supplements for dogsdiagnosed with hip dysplasia. In severe cases,surgery may be needed. Elbow dysplasiais a condition where the elbow joint develops abnormally. This is usually influenced by genetics, abnormal/rapid growth, diet, or trauma. The condition can cause pain, limping, and (like hip dysplasia) arthritis. Treatment of elbow dysplasia varies based on the severity, but surgery is required in most cases. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)is degeneration of the heart that causes the muscle of the left ventricle to become very thin and pump weakly. The symptoms (includingrapid breathing,lethargy, and adecreased appetite) may occur suddenly or progress gradually as the disease worsens over time, and it can eventually lead tocongestive heart failure. DCM is a very serious condition that requires intensive treatment, and not all dogs will return to normal. Feeding commercial kibble or wet food that's compliant with theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards is a good way to make sure your Newfie receives a complete and balanced diet. To maintain a healthy growth rate in Newfoundland puppies, they need to get the proper amounts of fat, protein, and carbohydrates. Newfie puppies can get all of their nutrition through AAFCO-compliantpuppy foods designed for giant and large-breed dogs. Talk to your vet about thebest dog foodfor your Newfoundland. Adult Newfies do best if fed about every 12 hours. A Newfoundland puppy may benefit from more frequent meals, so talk to your vet about the best feeding schedule for your dog. Because Newfoundland dogs are at risk of bloat and GDV, pet parents should take steps to reduce the chances of these conditions by: Helping their Newfoundland eat more slowly by usingslow feeder bowls,lick mats, orpuzzle feeders Avoiding raised food bowls, which may increase the chance of bloat Feeding their dog at least twice a day instead of one big meal Avoiding exercising their dog an hour before or after a meal As with humans, the recommended caloric intake required varies between dogs depending on their size, metabolism, and activity level. The best way to determine how much to feed your Newfoundland is to talk with your veterinarian and consult the feeding guide labels on your chosen dog food. Healthy, full-grown Newfoundland dogs eating an AAFCO-compliant diet should receive all needed nutrients. However, your vet may recommend certainsupplements for your dogbased on their specific needs. Never give your dog a supplement without speaking with your veterinarian first. A Newfoundland dog’s personality makes the breed an outstanding family pet. They have a sweet disposition and gentle nature, so Newfies get along well with children, small pets, and other dogs. But just like with all dogs, supervise all interactions between small kids and Newfoundlands. Newfies are gentle, but they’re big and might accidentally knock over a young child. Newfoundlands arecalm dogsthat don’t need an excessive amount of exercise—but this doesn’t mean no exercise. Take your Newfoundland ondaily walks,occasional hikes, or for a swim toprovide mental stimulationand preventobesity. Because Newfoundland dogs are so loving, some may developseparation anxietywhen left alone. You canhelp a dog with separation anxietyby providing them with enough exercise and mental stimulation when you’re together and by leavinginteractive toyswith your Newfie when you’re gone. Talk to your vet if your dog experiences separation anxiety. They can give you specific advice on how to help. Newfoundland dogs often pull on their leash;early leash trainingwill help prevent this. When bringing home a Newfoundland puppy, know that they won’t stay small for long. Newfoundland puppies grow quickly, to the point where they can overpower their human parents with pulling or jumping. Early andconsistent obedience trainingis a must. But Newfies aresmart dogs,which allows for successful training. Some can be strong-willed, but training will be successful when based onpositive reinforcementwith lots of rewards for good behavior. All dogs, even the friendly Newfoundland, need consistentsocialization as puppiesto help them be comfortable, confident, and well-behaved in different situations. Talk to your vet for advice on how to best socialize your Newfoundland puppy. Cart pulling Swimming Hiking Agility Flyball Walking The Newfoundland has a double coat: coarse and water-resistant on top with a soft, dense undercoat. This coat comes in a few different colors—you’ll find black, black and white, gray, and brown Newfoundland dogs. Newfies shed year-round but usually “blow their coat” twice a year, when the shedding is extra heavy. Consistent care is needed to maintain a healthy coat, but extensive grooming and professional appointments aren’t necessary. Newfoundland dogs do best ifbathed roughly once a month, but never more than once every two weeks. Bathe them after they’ve been swimming using adog-friendly shampoo. The Newfie’s long, coarse coat requires thorough brushing at least once a week toprevent mattingand remove dead hair. Brushing will also help limit the amount of fur that ends up on your furniture. Pet parents will also need to regularly wipe their Newfie’s drool, which can get caught in their fur. There are no special eye care needs for the Newfie. If a small amount of debris collects around the eyes, it can be cleaned with a soft, moist cloth orvet-recommended eye cleaner. Excesseye discharge, squinting,cloudiness, and/orrednesscan be signs of more serious eye conditions that warrant a vet exam. The Newfoundland’s floppy ears can easily trap debris and moisture, leading toear infections. To prevent infections,clean your dog’s earsat your vet’s recommendation with apet-specific ear cleaner. The Newfie’s sweet temperament makes them an excellent dog for families. Early positive reinforcement training and socialization are necessary due to their large size. They have a moderate energy level and do well when given a fun activity to stimulate their mind and body. But take note: Newfies shed a lot and drool even more, so having astrong vacuumand a towel on hand is encouraged. A full-grown Newfoundland dog’s size is 26–28 inches tall and weighs 100–150 pounds. The average Newfoundland lifespan is 9–10 years. The average Newfoundland dog price varies on many different factors, but you can expect to pay $1,500–$2,000 for a Newfie puppy from a breeder. You can also find Newfoundlands for adoption at shelters andbreed-specific rescues. When well-socialized and trained at a young age, the Newfie makes an excellent family pet—if you don’t mind some slobber. They have a gentle temperament and intelligent nature. All dogs bark, but Newfoundlands don’t have a reputation for excessive barking. They may bark to alert their pet parents. Virginia LaMon graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians