SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-peaches

Victoria Lynn Arnold Adobe_stock/Sergii Chernov  NOTE: Always check with your veterinarian before giving your dog any new foods, especially “people foods. ” What might be OK for one dog might not be good for your dog, depending on multiple factors such as their age, health history, health conditions, and diet. Dogs on prescription diets should not be fed any food or treats outside the diet unless your veterinarian tells you it’s fine to do so. Peaches are a juicy summer favorite for people, but can dogs eat peaches, too? Yes, both puppies and adult dogs can safely enjoy peaches in moderation, as long as you remove the pit and stem first. White peaches are sweeter and higher in sugar than yellow peaches, but both can be shared with dogs in small amounts. Here’s what you need to know about the benefits and risks of giving peaches to your dog. Yes, dogs can have peaches—just be sure to remove the pit, stem, and any leaves. Fresh, plain peaches are the safest option. Avoid canned peaches packed in heavy syrup because they contain a lot of added sugar. You can also find peaches in somestore-bought dog treats, including:  Yes, peaches can be a healthy snack for dogs in moderation. Some of the biggest benefits are: They’re rich in nutrients. Peaches are filled with antioxidants that helpstrengthen the immune systemto fight against disease andprevent cell damage. They also contain vitamins A, C, E, and K, as well as minerals like copper, zinc, magnesium, and phosphorus. The fiber in peaches can support healthy digestion and promoteregular bowel movements. They’re low in calories and fat. Peaches are a lighter treat option that won’t overload your dog with extra calories. So, are peaches safe for dogs in every situation? Not exactly. While they do have health benefits, there are also some downsides to keep in mind. While the natural sugars in peaches are fine in moderation, too much sugar over time can be dangerous for dogs with health problems likediabetesandobesity. The pit can be a choking hazard. Thepit—or stone—in a peach is quite large, making it potentially dangerous. The pit could become achoking hazardor cause anintestinal blockage. Peach pits contain amygdalin, a cyanide compound that’s toxic to dogs. However, dogs would have to chew up and swallow many pits for problems to develop. Signs of cyanide toxicity includevomiting,diarrhea,lethargy,loss of appetite,red gums, andexcessive panting. If your dog accidentally eats the peach pit or you notice any of these symptoms,contact your veterinarian immediately for advice. All treats combined, including peaches, should make up no more than 10% of your dog’s daily diet. The other 90% should come from awell-balanced dog food diet. Here are some general guidelines on how much peach to feed your dog. For reference, each piece should be no larger than a ½-inch wide slice. When feeding peaches to your dog for the first time, start slowly and watch for any signs of digestive upset, like diarrhea or vomiting. If your dog tolerates them well, you can increase to the recommended serving size. If you decide to give peaches to your pup, a little preparation can make them safer and easier for your dog to enjoy. Here’s how to do it: Wash thoroughly. Rinse the peach well to remove dirt and pesticide residue. Remove the stem, pit, and leaves. These are unsafe for dogs and can be toxic. Small slices (about ½-inch wide) help prevent choking and make it easier to stick to the recommended serving sizes. Once the peaches are prepped, you can feed them to your dog in a few safe and fun ways: As a food topper:If you’d like to add some variety to your dog’s regular mealtime, just mash a little bit of sliced peaches and mix them intoyour dog’s kibble. In a fruit smoothie:Blend some peach slices with otherdog-safe fruits. Give your dog a little bit as a treat or use it as a food topper. (Serve your dog no more than 2 tablespoons of smoothie per 10 pounds of dog. ) Mixed with yogurt:Blend or mash up some peach slices (you can add other dog-safe fruits to this mixture if you want) and mix them with plain,xylitol-free yogurt. Spread the mixture on alick mat, like theFrisco Silicone Lick Mat, for a fun treat. (Serve your dog no more than 2 tablespoons of the mixture per 10 pounds of dog. )  Stuffed in a KONG toy:You can stuff any of the mixtures above into your dog’sKONG toyand give it to your dog as-is, or freeze it for a refreshing frozen treat later. Frozen treats can also keep your pup occupied longer. Dehydrated:Use a home dehydrator to make chewy peach bites. Avoid store-bought dried fruit that contains added sugar and preservatives. Peaches aren’t the only fruit dogs can enjoy. Many others are safe in moderation and offer some health benefits, too. Some dog-friendly options include: Bananas Blueberries Cranberries Mango Raspberries Strawberries Watermelon If you’d rather not prep fresh fruit, you can also find these fruits in store-bought dog treats, like: Yes, both peaches and nectarines are safe for dogs in moderation, as long as the pits and stems are removed. They can be a choking hazard or cause an intestinal obstruction. Peach pits also contain cyanide compounds that, in large amounts, are toxic to dogs. Yes, most dogs can eat peach skin, but it can be hard to digest. Peel the skin off if your pup has a sensitive stomach. Although peaches are healthy and safe for dogs, be careful with store-bought peach yogurt. Some flavored yogurt from the store contains xylitol, which is toxic to dogs. You can make your own peach yogurt by mixing peaches with plain, unsweetened yogurt. Canned peaches that are packed in heavy syrup are not a great idea for a doggy treat, either. They contain lots of added sugar. Peaches that are canned with fruit juice are a better option. Frozen peaches could be a fun treat, but there are a few concerns. Store-bought frozen peaches often come in large chunks that could become a choking hazard for your dog, and if they are too hard, they might damage your dog’s gums or teeth. Thin slices of partially thawed peach should be safe, however. WRITTEN BY Victoria Lynn Arnold Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians