SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/bluetick-coonhound

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA With a name like Bluetick Coonhound, you may be expecting a humblehunting dog. But with a sleek coat, courageous demeanor, and ties to a Founding Father, the breed is anything but ordinary. Blueticks trace their ancestry back to French staghounds gifted to George Washington by his friend Marquis de Lafayette. Bred to be hunting companions, early Blueticks used their incredible noses and endurance to track down racoons, as well as far more fearsome quarry like bears, wild boars, and cougars. A member of the hound group, thebreed standardnotes that the brown-eyed Bluetick has the “typical pleading hound expression,” and their long, floppy ears add to their endearing charm. The first part of their name stems from the characteristic black-on-white speckles (ticking) that appear blue from a distance on their short, glossy coats. However, they commonly sport tan markings as well. Despite their history as hunters, Bluetick Coonhounds can thrive as family pets—if their humans properly accommodate for their size, exercise needs, and vocal tendencies. Males can be as big as 80 pounds and 27 inches tall, while females max out at 65 pounds and 25 inches. Dogs of this size need space—and dogs of this size with the near-boundless energy of a Bluetick needlotsof space. While you can take the Bluetick out of the hunt, you can’t quite take the hunt out of the Bluetick. The breed was built to use their brain while traversing great distances, so prospective owners should be prepared toprovide extensive mental stimulationand physical exercise every day. And because Bluetick Coonhounds have an insatiable instinct to follow their noses, this exercise needs to take place eitheron a leashor within a securely fenced area. Blueticks might also need extra space for another reason: They have a reputation for baying—a loud howl that sounds more like a yodel. It is a wonderfully useful and unique form of communication scent hounds like Blueticks use when hunting. The deep, booming sound is less popular, however, just about everywhere else. Training can help keep the baying at bay (as well as its better-known companions,howlingandbarking). But to be on the safe side, it’s best if you don’t have close neighbors or can be home to keep the hound’s hollering to a minimum. Bluetick Coonhounds aregenerally healthy dogswith anaverage lifespan of 11–12 years. Still, like all breeds, they are predisposed to some health problems. Bloat in dogsoccurs when gas and/or food cause the stomach to expand. Sometimes, bloat progresses into a condition calledgastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV), in which the dog’s stomach twists and cuts off blood flow to and from the stomach and the spleen, preventing food from passing into the intestine. In severe cases, the stomach can rupture. GDV is incredibly painful and is a life-threatening emergency, andall cases of bloat need immediate care to determine severity. Medication and fluids can treat minor cases of simple bloat, but GDV requires surgery. Any dog can experience bloat, but it’s more common in large and deep-chested breeds. Eating large amounts of food and water too quickly, exercising right after eating, eating from elevated food bowls, and eating one meal a day are other risk factors. Signs of bloat include: Retching or dry heaving without vomiting Swollen abdomen Sudden anxiety, pacing, or inability to get comfortable Downward dog position (dog’s front half is on the ground and back half is raised) Panting and drooling Tachycardia (racing heartbeat) Collapse If you notice any of these symptoms in your Bluetick, seek veterinary care immediately. The Bluetick’s characteristic long, floppy hound ears areprone to infection. Foreign bodies can easily become trapped, and bacteria and yeast can thrive in the warm, moist setting provided by their fur-covered flaps. The ultimate cause of infection will determine the treatment, buttopical cleansers, as well as topical and oral medications, are common. Signs of ear infections in dogs include: Redness Foul odor Scratching Pain Head shaking Head tilting Discharge No two Bluetick Coonhound pups are totally alike, so you’ll need to partner with your veterinarian to develop a feeding plan that’s nutritionally complete and balanced for your pup’s age, size, and health history. Most adult dogs should eat two meals a day, once in the morning and again in the evening. Breaking up feedings can also help protect against bloat. If your dog has ahabit of snarfing their food(another risk factor for bloat), try aslow-feeder bowl,food-dispensing toys,snuffle mats, or even just scattering their food across the floor so they have to move around to nab each bite of kibble. Because Bluetick Coonhound puppies have a higher metabolism than adult dogs, it’s generally best to add a midday feeding, fora total of three daily meals. The nutrition label on your dog’s bag of food will include a recommended daily feeding guide that gives you a general idea of how much to feed your Bluetick, based on their weight. For a more accurate amount, ask your veterinarian. A vet will tailor their recommendation not only to your dog’s weight, but also to theirbody condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. If your Bluetick Coonhound is eating acomplete and balanced diet of dog foodapproved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), they shouldn’t need anything extra. However,nutritional supplementsand evenprescription dietsare sometimes used to treat or prevent certain health conditions. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet. As you would expect with a dog bred to track quarry like bears and cougars, Bluetick Coonhounds are ambitious, active, andsmart dogsthat need a job to thrive (although this doesn’t need to involve a wild boar hunt, thankfully). But when given adequate mental and physical stimulation, these hounds are happy to curl up and take a well-deserved nap. Though affectionate and devoted companions, Blueticks may be better suited for older children, and experienced pet parents who know how to train and manage a dog with their intelligence and strength. If your Bluetick picks up on a scent they’d like to follow, it can be hard to divert their attention. Blueticks also tend to enjoy the companionship of other dogs, a trait that has served them well when hunting in packs. Blueticks need jobs and workmates. Without adequate exercise or companionship, these hounds can exhibitunwanted behaviors like chewingandexcessive barking. While training can help keep their howls and bays to a minimum, prospective pet parents should be prepared for a louder-than-average dog. And because Blueticks can be relentless in their pursuit of a scent that intrigues them, leashes and fenced yards are a must. All dogs go through a critical development period from birth to around 16 weeks of age. During this socialization window, they learn how to interact with humans and other animals. Talk to your Bluetick Coonhound breeder abouthow they approach socialization. If done well, it can pay dividends in adulthood. Bluetick Coonhounds are highly trainable thanks to their bright intellect and desire to please. Keep training fun with a rewards-based approach as opposed to using punishment. Consistent, positive reinforcement trainingcarries the added benefits of building the human-animal bond while providing mental and physical exercise. Long walks(with some freedom to follow their noses) Running Hiking Camping Hunting Agility Field trials Nose work Obedience training Skills training The Bluetick Coonhound’s characteristic short, glossy coat is a breeze to care for, though be prepared for moderate shedding. Bluetick Coonhounds don’t require any extra skin care. However, if your dog spends a lot of time outdoors, it’s a good idea toregularly check their skin for ticks. Your dog should also be kept onmonthly flea and tick preventatives. The Bluetick’s short fur needs only a once-a-week brushing to control shedding. How often you bathe your houndwill depend on how they spend their time outdoors (and where their nose leads them). Blueticks aren’t predisposed to any eye conditions, but it’s still a good idea to regularly check their eyes for signs of problems, likerednessandcloudiness. If you notice any changes in your pup’s eyes, talk to your veterinarian. Ear infections are common thanks to the Bluetick’s long, thin, floppy ears. Talk to your veterinarian about how andhow often you should clean your dog’s ears. If you notice signs of infection (such as pain, shaking, foul odor, or redness), schedule a vet appointment. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Bluetick Coonhound to your family: Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with extensive mental and physical exercise every day? Do I live in a home where a dog could howl or bay without being a neighborhood nuisance? Can I keep a dog on a leash or within a securely fenced area? Can I give a dog daily companionship? Do I have the skills and patience to train a dog using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for his lifetime, which could be 12 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you might be ready for a Bluetick Coonhound. Bluetick Coonhounds can be great house pets as long as their needs are met. Prospective pet parents should be prepared to provide daily mental and physical outlets to exhaust their large energy reserves, as well as close companionship. With their impressive stature (up to 80 pounds) and talent for howling and baying, apartment dwelling could prove problematic. The ideal home would provide these scent hounds with plenty of space to play and communicate without fear of bothering the neighbors. Bluetick Coonhounds were bred to work alongside humans and still prefer companionship to solitude. When left alone for long periods, Blueticks can experienceseparation anxietyand engage in unwanted destructive behaviors like chewing. Bluetick Coonhounds are generally not recommended for first-time pet parents. These intelligent, tenacious dogs typically do best with experienced people who know how to channel the breed’s energy and instincts into safe, appropriate activities. Starting with the most obvious difference, Blueticks have a characteristic blue hue in their short coats, while Redtick Coonhounds (also known as American English Coonhounds) have red and white ticking and medium-length fur. And though Blueticks trace their ancestry back to France, Redticks are descendants of the English Foxhound. Featured Image: Mary Swift/Royalty-free via Getty Images WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians