SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/siberian-husky

Adobe_stock/Sergey Bogdanov Siberian Huskies made their U. debut in 1908 when they were brought to Nome, Alaska, by Russian fur trader William Goosak. According to theSiberian Husky Club of America, Alaskans weren’t impressed with this Siberian breed at first. But over the century that followed, Husky dogs became one of the most popular breeds. 5 inches and weighing up to 60 pounds, Siberian Huskies are perhaps best known for their talkative personalities and endless energy. They do best in homes with active and experienced pet parents. Siberian Huskies need space to roam and a lot ofmental stimulation. Because of this, they make great pets for active families and children. A Siberian Husky will likely become bored with a sedentary lifestyle. Because Huskies are smart and active, they require consistent training from an early age. Lots ofsocialization with people and other animalsis important for Siberian Husky puppies, but these dogs won’t do well in homes with shared walls or close-by neighbors because they love to talk—loudly, and about everything! They are very vocal dogs and can beexpected to howl, sing, andbark. AlthoughSiberian Husky lifespanis fairly long (about 12–14 years), they can have a variety of health problems. Cataracts, a condition that’s thought to be inherited, is when the eye lenses harden. The rate of advancement varies, but a Siberian Husky puppy can begin developing juvenile cataracts anywhere between a few months to 6 years in age. Cataracts do affect vision but can be treated with surgery. If your Husky is experiencing any white opacity on the surface of the eye or vision loss, whether gradual or sudden, visit your veterinarian as soon as possible. Progressive retinal atrophyis an inherited degenerative disease of the eye’s retina. Research suggestsPRA is sex-linked in Huskies, as it’s more common in males. The earliest clinical sign of PRA is night blindness, which eventually progresses to loss of day vision as well. There is no known treatment, but certaindog DNA testscan flag if your dog carries the gene for PRA. Corneal dystrophyis another condition that’s most likely inherited. This disease is characterized by a white, opaque area that develops in the center of the cornea (the outermost clear surface of the eye). If the lesion grows, it can affect a Husky dog’s vision. Corneal dystrophy does not usually cause pain or require treatment unless it becomes advanced, resulting in an ulceration of the cornea. In these cases, pet parents are advised to take their Siberian Husky to an eye specialist. Hypothyroidismis a disease where the thyroid gland underproduces thyroid hormone, which causes an overall slowdown of your pet’s metabolism. This can predispose Siberian Huskies to weight gain, hair loss, or a coarse hair coat. They may also become less active over time. Dogs with chronic skin andear infectionsshould be tested for low thyroid hormone, as these conditions commonly occur together. Hypothyroidism is easily treated with a daily thyroid supplement. Another common condition in the Siberian Husky iship dysplasia. This is when the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, resulting in a loose joint that leads toarthritis. Common symptoms of hip dysplasia include: Surgery can treat hip dysplasia if it’s caught early enough. Veterinarians recommend that pet parents feed all dogs a food that meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), Siberian Huskies included. Your dog’s food should also match their life stage: Husky puppies (under 1 year old) should eat ahigh-quality puppy food. Full-grown Huskies shouldswitch to a food formulated for adult dogs. Older Huskies (7 years and above) can benefit from asenior dog food. Your veterinarian can help you determine what’s best to feed your dog. Feed your Husky frequent small meals during the day to help keep their metabolism at maximum efficiency andprevent obesity. Don’t leave food out all day for them to graze on, as Huskies can easily over-eat. Instead, feed your pup two to three meals per day at set times. Siberian Husky puppies need toeat more frequent meals, about three or four a day. As with any breed, always follow the dog food manufacturer’s instructions on how much to feed your pup. The daily total amount should be divided into two or three meals. Talking with your veterinarian can also help provide additional advice tailored to your pet’s dietary needs. Because Huskies enjoy days filled with heart-pounding exercise, feed them a good commercial diet compliant with the AAFCO’s guidelines. Healthy Huskies won’t need supplementation in their diet, but your vet may recommend certaindog supplements, such asjoint supplements,on a case-by-case basis. Siberian Huskies like to be active and part of the family. They’re smart, outgoing, and tend to be independent thinkers, which can easily lead to behavior problems—such asexcessive barkingandchewing up your furniture—if not corrected early as a puppy. If you’re a first-time Husky parent, consider reaching out to acertified professional trainerto get extra help. Look for a trainer that isfear-free certifiedand uses theLIMA method (Least Intrusive, Minimally Invasive). Huskies arefriendly dogsthat are typically good with kids and other pets, butthey are also very smartand strong-willed. They need to have room to run and be active with family members. If they’re cooped up all day or are not given proper attention, your Husky will be a handful. Always supervise dogs and children together. Bored Siberian Huskies have a reputation for being destructive indoors,digging holes outside, and escaping yards to run freely. It’s important to provide your Husky dog with lots of mental stimulation and activity or they will likely look elsewhere for entertainment. Training should start when your Siberian Husky is a puppy to correct unwanted behaviors before they become adults. Huskiesneed to be leash trainedso they don’t run off to explore on their own. They also need to be trained to avoidexcessive barkingand howling. Huskies can be independent, which can make them more difficult to train than some other breeds. Training your Husky needs to start as soon as you bring them home and be consistent. Training with treats before mealtimes can motivate your pup to work extra hard. As with most puppies, training sessions should be short, frequent, and with amplepositive reinforcement. Agility Rally Fetch Running Sledding Siberian Huskies have a very thick coat that comes in a wide range of colors; there are white, brown, black, and red Huskies. No matter your Husky’s color, you’ll often find hairs all over your floor, furniture, and clothing unless you take steps to keep it from flying. Regular upkeep should prevent your house from being covered in fluff. Huskies can be bathed minimally to maintain healthy skin. They typically don’t carry a normal “doggy” odor, sobathing is neededonly when they get a little smelly. Huskies have a thick double coat consisting of an undercoat and guard hairs. This undercoat sheds about twice yearly. Brushing them with a rake-style brush will help remove the loose undercoat, reduce shedding, and distribute oils evenly across the skin. Because Huskies are prone to many eye diseases, pet parents should take them for an annual eye exam, which can help diagnose disease early. If you notice any vision loss or changes to your pet’s eyes, seek immediate veterinary care. If you have a white Husky dog, they may developtear staining. These can be removed with a gentle eye wipe or washcloth. Most Huskies don’t have a lot of problems with their ears. But if you notice any debris or gunk there, clean them with ahigh-quality ear cleanser. If your Husky begins to excessively scratch at their ears, their ears smell, or they appear to be in pain, visit your veterinarian as soon as possible. This could be asign of an ear infection. Huskies can have plaque and tartar buildup on their teeth, just like humans. When left unchecked, this can lead to serious problems, includingdental disease. The best way to prevent dental disease is tobrush your dog’s teethat home with adog-specific toothpaste and toothbrush. It’s also important to keep up withveterinary wellness checkups, where your vet will examine your Husky’s teeth and recommendprofessional dental cleaningsas needed. Huskies were bred to be very active, working dogs. Because of this, they do best with active families that can give them at least 40 minutes of exercise every day. Running is a Husky’s favorite activity, and they will thrive with a pet parent who likes to jog daily. Without this physical and mental nourishment, Siberian Huskies will likely become destructive and loudly complain. Huskies do not make good apartment dogs due to their propensity to howl and bark. They require a lot of training starting in puppyhood and do best with experienced dog parents. Yes, Siberian Huskies can make good family dogs when they get enough exercise and mental stimulation. They are typically good with kids and other dogs. Huskies are very smart, and (because of their big brain) they require a lot of mental stimulation to stay entertained. The typical lifespan of a Husky is 12–14 years. If you ever see a dog that looks like a mini Siberian Husky or a forever cute Husky puppy, you might actually be looking at anAlaskan Klee Kai. This breed is descended from asmall gray and white Siberian Husky. The Siberian Husky price varies. A puppy from a Siberian Husky breeder can cost up to $1,500 depending on the bloodline, health, and location. You can also find Siberian Huskies for adoption at many shelters and rescues. There are black, brown, gray, sable, red, and white Siberian Huskies. Paul graduated from Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2005. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians