SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/presa-canario

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA volofin/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images The Presa Canario (also called the Perro de Presa Canario) is amastiff-type dogwith a serious look to match the serious work they’ve performed for hundreds of years. Originating from the Canary Islands of Tenerife and Gran Canaria, and sometimes referred to as Canary dogs or Canary Mastiffs, the Presa Canario’s mental and physical strength have long made them a prized pick for herding and guarding cattle. Thebreed standarddescribes Presa Canarios as having a balanced temperament: confident and a little distant but also docile, obedient, and devoted to their families. Noble in both character and appearance, the dogs range 84–110 pounds, are longer than they are tall, and sport an enormous head with a characteristic black mask and enormous jowls. Literally and figuratively thick-skinned, Presa Canarios are vigilant dogs who stand firm and focused with an endearingly furrowed brow when alert. While the Presa Canario has traditionally been a working dog, that doesn’t mean the breed can’t transition to family life. However, what makes them perfect for cattle work demands careful consideration for prospective pet parents. Presa Canarios are usually wary of strangers and closely bonded to their families: characteristics that make them ideal livestock guardians, notes thePresa Canario Club of America (PCCA). However, these attributes also mean they may not be the best choice for multi-pet households due to theirstrong prey drive. According to the PCCA, Presa Canarios thrive in homes that can provide plenty of attention and consistent guidance. And while they’re fairly low energy, the breed still needs daily exercise to keep their mind and body in good shape. The Presa Canario is considered agenerally healthy breedwith an average lifespan of 9–11 years. However, like all breeds, they are predisposed to certain health conditions. Hip dysplasiais a condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, causing joint instability that leads toarthritis in your dogif left untreated. Mild cases are treated with interventions likeweight loss,physical therapy,joint supplements, andanti-inflammatory drugs, but severe cases may requirecorrective surgery. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to navigate stairs, get up, or jump Loss of muscle mass in back legs Pain Elbow dysplasiais when an elbow joint hasn’t developed correctly, and it’s one of the most common causes of arthritis in dogs’ elbows. Anti-inflammatory medication can help with pain and inflammation, but your vet may ultimately recommend surgery to treat this condition. Common signs of elbow dysplasia include: Limping, especially after exercise Reluctance or unwillingness to walk or exercise Stiffness in the elbow joint Grating or crackling sound when elbow joint is moved Patellar luxationdescribes when the patella (kneecap) moves (luxates) outside of its normal groove within the femur. Signs vary by the condition’s severity, but limping, bunny-hopping, and a popping or cracking knee joint are common. If the dislocation is severe enough, your veterinarian may recommend surgery. Epilepsyis a brain condition that causes recurringseizures in dogs. Idiopathic epilepsy (or epilepsy of an unknown cause) is present in some Presa Canarios. Epileptic seizures tend to last one or two minutes, and signs can include loss of consciousness, uncontrollable spastic muscle movements, and loss of bowel and bladder control. Lifelong medication is used to manage the condition. Entropionis when a dog’s eyelid grows inward, which causes their eyelashes to rub against the surface of their eye. It’s the most common eyelid abnormality in dogs and can affect the upper lid, lower lid, or both. Signs of entropion include excessive tears,eye discharge, andred eyes. Your dog may also keep the affected eye closed. Entropion is painful and requires surgery to fix, but recovery is typically fast and smooth. Hypothyroidismis a disease in which the thyroid gland produces insufficient amounts of thyroid hormones. This can lead to multiple symptoms, including: Weight gain Lethargy Dry, brittle hair Chronicear infectionsandskin infections While there’s no cure, the condition can be managed with lifelong medication, and dogs with hypothyroidism often live long and happy lives. Work with your veterinarian to choosethe best dog foodand feeding plan for your Presa Canario. A vet can recommend a food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards and is nutritionally complete for your pet’s life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior), size, lifestyle, and health. Your chosen dog food should also be formulated for large breeds. It’s especially important that Presa Canario puppies eat alarge-breed puppy foodto support growth. Most adult Presa Canarios should eat two meals a day: once in the morning and again in the evening. Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your dog. As a large, deep-chested breed, Presa Canarios may be at risk of alife-threatening condition called bloat. To reduce the chances of bloat, pet parents should take certain precautions during mealtimes: Feed your dog multiple meals instead of one big daily meal. Avoid elevated or raised food bowls. Stop your dog from exercising two hours before and after they eat. Use aslow-feeder bowlorpuzzle toyto slow your Presa Canario down when they eat. Your AAFCO-compliant dog food packaging will include guidance for how much to feed your dog based on their size. Use this as a starting point, and ask your veterinarian for their recommendation. A veterinarian will take into account your dog’s age, weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. To help keep your Presa Canario at ahealthy weight, stay on top of how manydog treatsyou’re giving them. Treats should never make up more than 10% of a dog's daily calories. If your Presa Canario is eating a complete and balanced dog food that’s AAFCO-compliant, they’ll receive all needed nutrients. However, your vet may recommend certaindog supplementsto address specific health conditions, such as joint supplements to help dogs with hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia, or patellar luxation. Always talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. As historic guardian dogs, Presa Canarios have off-the-charts courage and confidence. But importantly, they form loyal, affectionate attachments to their families; they’re even well-suited to snuggling. It may be hard to imagine such a muscular, stern-looking dog craving cuddle time oracting as your shadow, but Presa Canarios absolutely do. Given their size and strength, Presa Canarios aren’t an ideal companion for very young children, and all interactions between kids and dogs should be closely monitored to ensure the safety of both the pet and the child. Presa Canarios tend to do best in homes where they can be the only dog, but remember that every dog is an individual with their own personality. And because of their prey drive, it’s best to avoid other animal housemates like cats and bunnies, too. Presa Canarios may look tough, but they crave close companionship with their families. And while they aren’t a particularlyhigh-energy breed, they do need daily exercise. Bored, lonely Presa Canarios may express their displeasure with unwanted behaviors likebarkingandchewing. Presa Canarios have a high prey drive, so all outdoor exercise should be done either on aleashor within asecurely fenced area. As with all dogs, it’s important to safely expose Presa Canario puppies to new situations early and consistently. This process is calledsocialization, and it helps dogs become well-behaved, comfortable, and confident in different settings as they age. Socialization is especially important for breeds like the Presa Canario, which can be naturally aloof around strangers. Ask your veterinarian about socialization activities that are safe for your pet’s age. Along with socialization, early and consistentobedience trainingis a must for Presa Canarios. Always usepositive reinforcement methodsto build the human-animal bond. If you find that you’re unable to provide the kind of training your Presa Canario needs, tap the help of acertified professional trainer. It’s an investment that will pay dividends to both you and your pet. Walking Hiking Swimming Fetch Agility Rally Obedience training Skills training The Presa Canario’s coat is short and coarse to the touch, according to the breed standard, and comes in shades of brown, fawn gold, orange, silver, and tiger with white and brindle markings. Regardless of color, you can expect a coat that’s very easy to maintain. If your Presa Canario spends a lot of time outdoors, regularly check them for burrs, sticks, and other debris that can get stuck in their fur and irritate their skin. Checking your dog for ticksis also important, as is providing them withyear-round flea and tick prevention. The Presa Canario’s coat isn’t prone to matting, but it does shed regularly. Weekly brushingcan help keep those hairs in check while supporting overall coat health. Use a slicker brush, like theTweezerman Coated Tip Brush, to remove loose hairs effectively. How often your Presa Canario needs a bath depends on their lifestyle. But in general, anoccasional bathshould suffice. Talk to your veterinarian about how often to bathe your dog and whichdog shampoois best for their coat. Presa Canarios have documented issues with entropion (when the eyelid grows inward) but can experience other eye problems as well. If you notice squinting, watery eyes, redness, discharge,cloudiness, or apparent vision changes, call your veterinarian. Presa Canarios aren’t prone to ear problems. However, call your vet if you noticesigns of an ear infection, such as redness, swelling, discharge, and odor. Your vet may recommendcleaning your dog’s ears regularly. If so, ask whichear-cleaning productsthey recommend for your Presa Canario. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Presa Canario to your family: Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with exercise every day? Can I keep a dog on a leash or within a fenced area when outdoors? Am I home enough to provide a dog with close companionship? Can I provide dog with a high prey drive with a home that doesn’t include any other pets? Do I have the skills and patience to provide early socialization and consistent training using positive reinforcement? Am I OK with some extra fur on my furniture and clothes? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 11 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Presa Canario. Whether a Presa Canario is agood family dogdepends on the family in question. The breed thrives in families who can provide ample attention, early and thorough socialization, and consistent, lifelong training. Yes, Presa Canarios are legal in the United States. Every breeder is different, but you can generally expect to pay at least $1,500 (and likely more) for a Presa Canario puppy. You could be forgiven for mistaking a Presa Canario for aCane Corso. Although they developed in two different regions, the breeds share a lot in common. However, Cani Corsi (the plural form of Cane Corso) are official members of the American Kennel Club and tend to be a bit more energetic and biddable than Presa Canarios—though it’s worth noting that every dog is unique. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians