SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/brussels-griffon

elenaleonova/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images With a near-human expression, Brussels Griffons are adorable, intelligent, and social dogs that quickly win over fans with their larger-than-life personalities. They are also small dogs, weighing in at 6–14 pounds and 7–10 inches tall. This, coupled with theirfriendly temperament, makes themperfect apartment dogs. Brussels Griffons are known for their expressive, almost childlike faces and large, wide-set prominent eyes. Their stocky bodies and characteristic, purposeful trot are reflections of their heritage as vermin hunters in Belgium. Because of their unique physical characteristics, the Brussels Griffon dog breed is often compared to the Ewoks from “Return of the Jedi. ” Brussels Griffons belong to a class of dogs calledbrachycephalic dogs, which means they have a short snout and flat-faced appearance. This makes themmore prone to snoreandmore sensitive to hot, humid weather. Because of this, Brussels Griffons should not be left outside for extended periods of time. Conversely, given their small size, theydo not tolerate extreme cold, either. They also love companionship and are known as “Velcro” dogs to their adoring humans. So, if you are planning on adding a Brussels Griffon puppy to your family, be prepared for a dog who wants to spend all their time with you. The average Brussels Griffon lifespan is 12–15 years and they are a generallyhealthy breedwith few health concerns. But, like all dogs, they might develop a few health conditions. Hip dysplasiais an instability or loose fit of the hip joint, which occurs in growing dogs because the hip socket does not fully cover the ball portion of the femur (thigh bone). This results in pain andarthritis in dogs. Clinical signs of hip dysplasia are more prominent in large breed dogs. Luckily, thanks to their small stature, Brussels Griffons typically have minimal signs of pain or discomfort. Hip dysplasia in Brussels Griffons can usually be managed with ajoint supplementormedication. Rarely, they may needsurgical intervention. Patella luxationis a condition where the kneecap slips in and out of place. This can result in knee arthritis and pain. Often, joint supplements andanti-inflammatory medicationsare sufficient treatment for thesesmall dogs. However, if the luxation is severe, surgery may be recommended to correct the issue and keep the kneecap in place. Brussels Griffons can be predisposed tocataracts,progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), andeye injuries. Cataracts, or cloudiness of the lens of the eye, can be corrected surgically by a veterinary ophthalmologist if it occurs. PRA is an inherited form of degenerative ocular disease with no treatment or cure. It progresses toblindness in dogsbut isn’t painful. Due to their prominent eyes, Brussels Griffons are prone to eye injuries such as scratches or irritation. If yourdog’s eyes are redor they are rubbing at them, check in with your veterinarian. Adultdogs generally have 42 teeth. But Brussels Griffons, with their “smoosh-faced” anatomy, have less space to fit these 42 teeth, causing the teeth to be crowded and grow at odd angles This increases tartar and causes food or debris to become trapped easily, which can lead todental disease. Therefore,canine dental careis very important and Brussels Griffons will likely benefit from dailyat-home tooth brushingas well as routinedental cleaningsdone by your veterinarian. Other aspects of dental care, likevet-recommended dental chewsandwater additives, also help prevent dental disease. There are lots of diets on the market, and finding the right food for your Brussels Griffon can be overwhelming. AnAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)-compliant food is a good place to start to ensure that the food you select meets standard nutritional requirements for pet foods. Other considerations for the Brussels Griffon include small-bite or small-breed diets (due to their size), and possibly a vet-approved dental diet given their propensity for dental issues. Talk with your veterinarian regarding your pet’s specific needs when selecting thebest dog foodfor your Brussels Griffon. As small dogs, Brussels Griffons appreciate a few feedings throughout the day—typically two or three meals total. They can be slightly picky or finicky eaters, so choosing a highly palatable diet or even usingfood toppersmay be useful. Always select a diet that’s appropriate for your pet’s life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior). Whendetermining how much to feed your dog, it’s important to read the instructions on the bag or can. The caloric content of each food can vary significantly, and therefore the food bag or can (along with your vet’s advice) is the best place to make that determination. Maintaining a healthy weightand monitoring your pet’s caloric intake are keys to a healthy lifestyle. So be sure to discuss your Brussels Griffon’s ideal weight with your veterinarian and adjust the amount you are feeding based on ideal weight, not current weight. Also, don’t forget thatdog treatscount as calories too. While they are great for training, giving too many can lead tooverweight pups. Treats should never make up more than 10% of a dog’s daily calories. Always discuss anysupplementsor diet aids with your veterinarian before starting them to ensure they are right for your pet. Brussels Griffons may benefit fromomega-3 fatty acid supplementsto keep their gorgeous coats healthy and shiny. They may also benefit from joint supplements with omega-3s, glucosamine, and chondroitin to maintain healthy cartilage. Brussels Griffons are big personalities in small packages. Known for their childlike expressions and intelligence, this breed will keep you entertained. These dogs are best suited for pet parents who prioritize companionship and are prepared to spend a lot of time with their dog. They are considered “Velcro dogs” and don’t like to be left alone for extended periods of time. They will flourish in settings where they can be a central part of the family. Brussels Griffons have a medium energy level and will do fine with up to 30 minutes of moderate activity orneighborhood walksper day. They are happy to get up and go, or to take more of a lounging role—as long as they are with their loving pet parent, they’re happy. Brussels Griffons typically do well in families with children, other dogs, or cats, but they can be sensitive, so supervision is recommended. Similarly, Brussels Griffon dogs can be nervous around strangers or in new situations. However,early and consistent socializationcan help them feel more confident and comfortable. In general, they are fun-loving, happy dogs. But expect them tobark when someone knocks at the door. Brussels Griffons are smart and have a strong bond with their pet parents, making them easy totrain with positive reinforcement. They will benefit from socialization and puppy training classes to help ensure a well-rounded, confident dog with good manners. Most Brussels Griffons also enjoy tricks training, and some will do very well inagility classes. As with many toy breeds, Brussels Griffons can take some extra time withpotty trainingand patience is the key. Due to their sensitive nature, Brussels Griffons do not respond well to harsh correction and require more of a gentle approach. They will also often develop undesirable behaviors if left alone for long periods of time, as they strongly prefer to be with their family. Learning tricks Agility Up to 30-minute daily walks Cuddling Brussels Griffons come in four colors: red, beige (black and reddish brown with black face), black and tan, and black. There are also two types of Brussels Griffon coats—smooth and rough. The length of their coat will affect the level of grooming needs you can expect. As brachycephalic dogs, Brussels Griffons have a nose fold that needs to be kept clean and dry. Their face folds should be cleaned around once a week. You can use a warm, wet wash cloth to wipe the area or a dog-safe face wipe, likeVetnique Labs Grooming Wipes. Be sure to dry it off afterward to prevent accumulation of bacteria or yeast. The smooth-coated Brussels Griffons have a straight, short, glossy coat that requiresoccasional bathsanddaily to weekly brushing. You can expect short-haired Brussels Griffons to shed a moderate amount. The rough-coated Brussels Griffons have a wiry, dense coat and characteristic beard. Rough-coated Brussels Griffons will have moderate grooming demands, requiring professional grooming every four to eight weeks in addition to occasional baths and weekly brushing. The rough-coated Brussels Griffons do not shed, unlike their smooth-coated counterparts. Brussels Griffons have large, prominent eyes that are prone to injury. If your dog’s eyes have discharge, are red, or if your dog is rubbing at them, talk with your veterinarian. Perform regularear cleanings, especially after bath time to make sure the ears remain dry. If you notice debris in the ear, redness, or odor, please contact your veterinarian. These could besigns of an ear infection. Always brush your dog’s teeth withdog-safe toothpaste(never human toothpaste, which can be toxic) and atoothbrush. As with all breeds, you’ll need totrim your dog’s nailsregularly to keep them neat and short. If you can hear your Brussels Griffon’s nails clicking on the floor, it’s time for a trim. The Brussels Griffon can be classified as a clingy dog, so the breed is best for a pet parent who wants to spend a lot of time with a furry companion. They are also a bit tricky to potty train, so a family with experience (and a lot of patience) is recommended. The most prominent health concern for pet parents to be aware of when considering a Brussels Griffon is their brachycephalic face. Their short snout makes it difficult for this dog to pant effectively, making them prone to overheating. Care should be taken to limit exercise and extended periods of time outside during the summer months and during poor air quality days. Brussels Griffons typically do well in families with children, other dogs, or cats. That said, all interactions between kids and dogs should be supervised to make sure these little pups aren’t accidentally injured during playtime. Brussels Griffons are known for their high degree of intelligence and strong bond with their pet parents. While prices may vary depending on specific breeders and geographic location, one can expect to pay $1,500–$2,000 for a Brussels Griffon puppy. You can look for a dog at theNational Brussels Griffon Rescue. While they are slightly more common in Europe because they originated in Belgium, they are considered anuncommon breed in the U. They are nicknamed “Velcro” dogs due to their strong desire to be with their pet parents. Brussels Griffons thrive on companionship and do not do well when left alone for extended periods of time. Brussels Griffons will often even pick a favorite person to snuggle with. Veronica Higgs is a 2010 graduate from Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians