SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/dorgi

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA The Dorgi is a spunky mix between theDachshundand thePembroke Welsh Corgiwith a surprising connection to English royalty: Queen Elizabeth II is oftencredited with the breed’s creation. Currently, the Dorgi dog is not recognized as an official breed with the American Kennel Club and therefore lacks an official breed standard. However, the two parent breeds are well established and provide a helpful framework for making predictions regarding appearance and temperament. Both Dachshunds and Pembrokes are low to the ground, with long bodies and short legs. Dachshunds originally leveraged their unique physique to hunt badgers in underground tunnels—Dachshundis German forbadger dog—while Pembrokes were bred to herd cattle and sheep. Some of the common characteristics that helped these breeds excel in their work includebarking loudly and often; clever and independent thinking; and a boldness that outsizes their compact frames. Dorgis likely inherited these working-dog attributes from their parents, but that doesn’t mean they can’t thrive as family pets, too. Dorgis love their people, and with appropriate socialization and training they can become fun, playful, affectionate companions. Dorgis tend to weigh 30 pounds or less and max out at 12 inches in height. This manageable size makes them a good fit for a lot of different living situations. Their temperament, however, may not be a great fit for every family. For example, while the Dorgi’s big-dog bark and watchdog tendencies would be prized during a badger hunt or while herding livestock, these traits could make living in an apartment (i. , sharing walls with other people) difficult. And yet, Dorgis are definitely indoor dogs. Their social needs demand close proximity to their humans. Speaking of family companions, dogs with as much energy and spunk as Dorgis may not be the best choice for families with very young children, as they may play too rough. And Dorgis who take after their Pembroke parent may attempt to herd their human siblings. But once kids are old enough to safely interact with dogs, Dorgis can become loyal, affectionate playmates. Dorgis can also do well with other pets—especially if they grow up alongside them—though keep in mind that the Dachshund’sstrong prey drivemay put small pets at risk. Both Dachshunds and Pembroke Welsh Corgis arehealthy dog breedswith long life expectancies of 12–16 years and 12–13 years, respectively, so you can generally expect a Dorgi’s lifespan to fall within these ranges. Still, like all dogs, the two parent breeds are prone to various health conditions that can be passed to their Dorgi puppies. Dachshunds are predisposed tointervertebral disc disease (IVDD), which describes when one or more spinal discs (i. , the padding between the bones of the spinal column) rupture, slip, or bulge. This condition can cause pain, nerve damage, paralysis. Mild cases can be treated with rest, medication, andphysical therapy. Severe cases of IVDD may require surgery. The signs of disease depend on which spinal discs are affected but may include: Limping Dragging of back legs Stumbling over back feet Hunched back or neck Pain Weakness Decreased activity level Loss of bladder or bowel control Decreased appetite Front- or hind-limb paralysis Periodontal disease, or gum disease, is a progressive condition in which bacteria accumulate in the mouth, causing damage to the dog’s gums, teeth, jaw bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs, small breeds like Dachshunds and Corgis are especially prone to the problem. Signs of periodontal disease include: Red, irritated gums Drooling Bad breath Low appetite Facial swelling Discolored, loose, or missing teeth Root exposure Brushing your dog’s teeth at homeevery day is the best way to prevent periodontal disease from developing. Dogs that do develop this condition will need aprofessional dental cleaningand possible tooth extractions. A Dorgi can develop a handful of joint problems throughout their life, including: Patellar luxation:The kneecap moves outside its normal position, causing limping; a cracking or popping sound from the knee; and/or a bunny-hopping gait. Hip dysplasia:The hip joint doesn’t develop correctly, which causes pain andarthritis. Elbow dysplasia:An elbow joint develops improperly, causing looseness and pain. Treatments for joint problems in Dorgis depend on the severity, so talk with your veterinarian. They may recommendpain medication,joint supplements, weight management, or even surgery. Pembrokes are prone todegenerative myelopathy (DM), an inherited, progressive disease of the spinal cord similar to Lou Gehrig’s disease (ALS) in people. Affected dogs typically don’t show signs of illness until they’re 8 years old or older. And while there are ways to manage the signs of DM and even slow their progression, there isn’t a cure. The signs of DM often start in one of the back limbs, then progress to include the other. These signs include: Difficulty getting up Weakness in back legs Uncoordinated movements Muscle loss Scuffed toenails, or wounds to the top of the paws on back limbs, from dragging the feet Von Willebrand disease (vWD)is a genetic blood disorder that, while rare, is more common in Pembroke Welsh Corgis. The condition causes a deficiency in the von Willebrand factor, a protein that helps platelets stick together to form a blood clot. Affected dogs may have difficulty with their blood clotting normally. This can lead tobleeding from the nose, vulva, bladder, or gums. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)is one of the most common congenital heart defects in dogs, and the Dorgi’s Pembroke parent carries a heightened risk. The ductus arteriosus is a blood vessel that’s necessary during fetal development to divert blood from the fetus’s lungs. This vessel closes shortly after birth to allow blood to flow through the lungs. But in Dorgi puppies with PDA, the ductus arteriosus stays open, resulting in a dangerous disruption of normal circulation. This can lead toheart failureunless a dog undergoes surgery to treat the condition. Work with your veterinarian tochoose the best dog foodfor your Dorgi. The food you select should: MeetAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards Be nutritionally complete for your dog’s lifestyle, size, and health Be formulated for your dog’s current life stage (puppy,adult, orsenior) Most adult Dorgis should eat two meals a day, once in the morning and again in the evening. Dorgi puppies, however, have a higher metabolism and may need up to four meals a day. Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your Dorgi. To determine how much to feed your dog, do two things: Look at thenutrition label on your dog’s food bag. This provides a general idea of how many calories your Dorgi needs, based on their weight. They can make a highly personalized recommendation based on your individual pup’s weight, body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Treatsadd up quickly in small dogs, making Dorgis prone toobesity. Be sure treats never make up more than 10% of your dog’s daily diet. Your Dorgi should receive all the nutrients they need if they eat a dog food that meets AAFCO standards. However, your veterinarian may recommendnutritional supplementsto treat or prevent various health issues. For example, if your dog is diagnosed with a luxating patella, your vet may recommend a joint supplement. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. Dorgis are spunky,friendly dogswith parents that were bred to work. Likewise, their offspring need jobs—regardless of whether they’re an official breed. Daily exerciseand play is important for keeping their brain and body healthy, and for expending some of their ample energy supply. Luckily, Dorgis are game for a wide range of fun activities. However, Dorgis may unwittingly play a bit too rough with very young children and may even try herding them. Similarly, the Dorgi’s high prey drive (from their badger-hunting Dachshund parent) could pose a risk to other small animals in the home. That being said, well-trained and socialized Dorgis can do well with other pets—especially if they grow up together. The Dorgi’s prey drive can also cause problems outside. Trailing a scent or a visible creature can lead them into trouble, so all outdoor play should take placeon a harness and leash, or within a fenced area. Bored, lonely Dorgis with energy to spare are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors, includingexcessive (and loud) barking,digging(remember that Dachshunds are champion tunnelers), andchewing. Pembrokes in particular like to use their mouths to explore, and their herding instincts can lead them to nip at the heels of running children. Incorporate playtime,interactive toys, andmental stimulationinto your dog’s daily routine. When bringing home a Dorgi puppy, one of the most important thing you can do is expose your dog to new animals, people, environments, activities, and objects during their first 16 weeks of life. Socializing your puppycan help them feel comfortable not only as puppies but also as full-grown Dorgis. Dorgis aresmart dogswho love to please, but they can also display a bit of independence when it comes to training. As with all dogs, apatient, positive, rewards-based trainingapproach is best not only for teaching your dog new skills, but also for providing mental stimulation and strengthening the human-animal bond. Regular walks Scent walks Obedience training Skills training Puzzle toys Nose work Earthdog Agility AKC Rally Herding Dachshunds have three coat types—smooth, longhaired, and wirehaired—each with their own grooming needs. While smooth coats don’t really need to be brushed, longhaired and wirehaired Dachshunds may need regular brushing or combing. Pembroke Welsh Corgis have a short double coat that’s thick and coarse on top, and soft and dense underneath. Regardless of which parent they favor, upkeep for Dorgis is fairly simple—these are the offspring of working dogs, after all. But regular shedding should be expected. Keeping your dog’s coat healthy is key to keeping their skin healthy. Tangles and matting can keep moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your Dorgi’s skin, causing irritation,infection, and other problems. Talk to your veterinarian abouthow often you should bathe your dog. Keep in mind that bathing your pup too often can strip their skin of healthy oils, causingdry and itchy skin. How often you need to brush your Dorgi depends on their coat type. Longer, thicker fur is more prone to matting and needs to be brushed more regularly. No matter your Dorgi’s coat, expect regular year-round shedding. Keeping up with a brushing schedule can help reduce the amount of fur that ends up on your furniture and floor. Both of the Dorgi’s parent breeds are prone to multiple eye issues. Schedule a vet appointment if you notice signs of disease, like redness or discharge. Depending on your Dorgi’s coat type, you may need to trim the hair around their eyes to help avoid eye irritation. Ask your veterinarian for tips onhow to safely clean your dog’s ears. If you notice signs of anear infection(discharge, redness, swelling, pain, or bad odor), it’s time to make a vet appointment. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Dorgi puppy to your family: Do I live in a home where lots of barking would be OK? Am I OK with regular shedding? Can I brush a dog’s teeth every day? Am I home enough to give a dog companionship? Do I have time to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise every day? Do I have the skills and patience to train a dog with a mind of its own, by using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 16 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Dorgi. Yes, Queen Elizabeth did indeed own Dorgis. In fact, she’s often credited as being one of thebreed’s inventors—albeit by accident—when Princess Margaret’s Dachshund, Pipkin, mated with one of the Queen’s Corgis, Tiny, in the 1970s. Dorgis are generally healthy dogs with a lifespan of 12–16 years. Dorgis are a mix between a Dachshund and a Pembroke Welsh Corgi. Photo credit: Wikimedia Commons WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians