SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/symptoms/itchy-dog

Thiradech/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  At some point you’ve probably asked yourself, “Why is my dog itching so much?” Dogs scratch,lick, chew, or rub their skin for many reasons—most commonly allergies, parasites, infections, or contact irritants. Treatment depends on what’s driving the itch. For example, environmental allergies (such asseasonal allergies) are often managed with prescription anti-itch medications likeZenrelia. Flea infestations require effective parasite control, while bacterial or fungal infections are treated with medications that eliminate the infection and soothe inflamed skin. Dogs may show itchiness due to several common health issues, including: Allergies to environmental triggers likepollen, mold spores, and dust mites Contact dermatitis, a reaction to irritants likedetergentsorfertilizers Skin parasites likefleas,ticks,lice, andmange mites. Bug bites(mosquitoes, for example) can also make dogs itchy. Allergic reactionstofood ingredients, which can also lead todiarrhea,vomiting, and othersigns of digestive upset Skin infectionsandear infections—bacteriaorfungimay be to blame  If itchiness is mild and not accompanied by severe symptoms, try these first: Check the skin and coat for fleas, ticks, or obvious issues. If you see an attached tick, you canremove it at home. Do you seelots of fleas? Good flea treatments likeK9 Advantix IIandFrontline Plusare available over the counter. Oral flea treatments, such as Capstar, can also be used to kill fleas quickly. Bathe your dog with a soothing, vet-approved shampoo. Shampoos likeDouxo S3 CALMorEarthbath Oatmeal & Aloe Fragrance Free Dog & Cat Shampoowill both soothe your dog’s skin and remove irritants or allergens from their coat. Offeromega-3 fatty acid supplements. Such supplements can help support skin health. Makean appointment with your veterinarianif home treatments aren’t effective for your dog. Don’t try treating your pet at home if your dog has: Hair loss, very red or inflamed skin, or sores Signs of infection (odor, oozing) Persistent intense scratching that doesn’t improve Signs ofanaphylaxis, which include sudden vomiting, diarrhea, facial swelling, and difficulty breathing—this constitutes a medical emergency These signs suggest a deeper issue that needs professional diagnosis and treatment. Health Tools Provide a few details about what’s going on, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will quickly help you find out what to do next. Provide a few details about what’s going on, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will quickly help you find out what to do next. Your veterinarian will start looking for the cause of your dog’s itching by doing a thorough physical examination and asking you some questions, such as: Is your dog onparasite prevention? What kind and how often do you use it? When did you first notice your dog’s itchy skin? Is it getting better or worse, or is it about the same? Is your dog itchy all the time or just during certain seasons? Have you tried any home remedies, and have they worked? Are other pets or people in the home also itchy? Have you noticed any other symptoms? At this point, your vet may be able to recommend treatment, but more testing could also be needed. This can include: Skin scrapings to look for mange mites Skin cytology to find infections Fungal cultures forringworm A health workup includingblood work,urinalysis, andfecal examination Allergy testing Skin biopsy Most of the time, a veterinarian will start with the simple, inexpensive tests and only move on to other testing if your dog doesn’t respond well to treatment. Whenever possible, itch relief for dogs should be aimed at the underlying problem: Environmental allergies: Treatment for environmental allergies can involve prescription medications likeZenrelia. A single daily dose of Zenrelia can help to quickly relieve itching in dogs over 12 months old. Along with medications like Zenrelia, your vet may also recommend baths, immunotherapy (allergy shots or drops), omega-3 fatty acid supplements, orantihistamines. Contact dermatitis: Removing or avoiding the irritant causing the reaction is key, along with medications to control itching and inflammation, and topical therapies to help soothe and heal the skin. Parasites (fleas, ticks, mites, and lice): These can be removed with the right parasiticides. Your veterinarian can help you pick out the best medication for your dog. Food allergies: Food allergies are managed with a diet that doesn’t contain the dog’s specific allergen, which is typically a protein. Veterinary dietsare needed for a diet trial of eight to 12 weeks. Bacterial and fungal infections: Infections are often treated with medicated baths and with prescription antibiotics or antifungal medications. Keeping a dog’s skin as healthy as possible can go a long way toward keeping them itch-free. Ways you can prevent itchy skin in dogs include: Feed anutritious, balanced diet Consider an omega-3 fatty acid supplement Bathe andbrush your dogas needed to keep their coat clean and to prevent mats and tangles  Usean effective, broad-spectrum parasite preventiveyear-round Look over your dog’s coat and skin very well at least once a month. This will help you catch any problems that do develop early—when itch relief for dogs can help the most. Closely check your dog’s skin to see if you can find any obvious problems like fleas. A soothing dog shampoo may also help, but speak to your veterinarian if the itching continues. Fleas may still be to blame for a dog’s itching even if you can’t see them. It can take just one bite to make a dog withflea bite allergiesextremely itchy. Other common causes for dog itchiness include environmental allergies, food allergies, other parasites (like mange mites), and bacterial or fungal infections. Whenever possible, it’s best to treat the underlying cause of a dog’s itching, but sometimes symptomatic treatment is needed too. Bathing your dog—particularly using a vet-approved calming shampoo and offering omega-3 fatty acid supplements—can reduce itching in dogs. Allergies, parasites (especially fleas), and infections are among the most common causes of itchiness in dogs. If you see hair loss, very red skin, open wounds, or your dog seems miserable—contact your vet promptly. Anaphylaxis, which is a severe allergic reaction that causes sudden vomiting, diarrhea, and difficulty breathing, is a medical emergency. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians