SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/chinese-crested

Erica Vasquez The Chinese Crested is a unique dog known for her hairless appearance and elegant, graceful nature. Standing 11–13 inches tall and weighing 8­­–12 pounds, this toy breed comes in two varieties: hairless and powderpuff. The hairless Chinese Crested has smooth, soft skin accentuated by silky hair on her head, feet, and tail. The powderpuff Chinese Crested has a full coat of long locks. Despite the breed’s name, it’s unlikely these hairless dogs originated in China—agenetic studyactually points to Mexican origins. But no matter where they came from, the Chinese Crested has been bred to be an affectionate companion for centuries. The Chinese Crested’s cheerful disposition means she fits in well with most families, including those with kids and other pets. But all interactions between kids and this breed should be supervised, as Chinese Cresteds are so small and “fine-boned” that they can easily be hurt accidentally when playing. These pups are also a good fit for older adults or those who live in small apartments. It’s easy to get them the relatively small amount of exercise they need to stay healthy, and they’re often happy spending time playing indoors or lounging on the couch. In fact, theAmerican Chinese Crested Club (ACCC)describes the breed as having a “cat-like” personality. Chinese Crested dogs aregenerally healthyand tend tolive a long life(up to 18 years!), but they are prone to certain health conditions. Regular checkups and a healthy lifestyle can help minimize the risk of these issues. To reduce the incidence of health problems in the breed, theOrthopedic Foundation of America(OFA) recommends that prior to breeding, Chinese Cresteds be screened for the following: Eye problems Patellar luxation Heart problems Primary lens luxation Progressive retinal atrophy Congenital deafness Hip dysplasia Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease Before purchasing a Chinese Crested puppy, ask breeders for the results of any screening tests that they have run on the puppy’s mother and father. Many tiny dog breeds have trouble with their teeth, and the Chinese Crested is no exception. This dog is known to havedental issuessuch as early tooth loss andgum disease. Pet parents mustbrush their dog’s teethat home andschedule dental cleaningsas recommended by a vet to keep their Crested’s mouth healthy. Poor dental health isn’t just bad for a dog’s teeth—it can cause organ damage as well. Some Chinese Cresteds may be susceptible toeye conditionssuch asprogressive retinal atrophy (PRA),primary lens luxation (PLL), anddry eye. While some issues (such as PLL) can sometimes be surgically corrected, others (such as PRA) are untreatable and lead to total vision loss. If you notice any changes in your dog’s eyes or vision, talk to your vet. Some Chinese Crested puppies are born deaf. While deaf dogs can certainly live full and happy lives, pet parents must make special arrangements, such astraining them with hand signals, to keep them safe. Patellar luxationis a common health concern found in Chinese Cresteds. It occurs when the kneecap slips out of place. This can cause your dog to skip or walk with a bunny-hopping gait. Some mild cases of patellar luxation do not need treatment, while others can be managed with anti-inflammatory medications and nutritional supplements that support joint health. In severe cases, surgery may be recommended. Chinese Crested can also develophip dysplasiaorLegg-Calvé-Perthes disease, two genetic conditions affecting the hips. Treatment can include medications and supplements to reduce pain and inflammation, physical therapy, and surgery. Hairless areas of skin require special protection from the sun and cold temperature. Even with an extra level of skin care, Chinese Cresteds can develop dry skin, comedones (blocked pores), and other skin problems. When choosingthe best dog foodfor your Chinese Crested, select one that meets the nutritional requirements of theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)and is formulated for your dog’s life stage (puppy, adult, or senior). Popular high-quality brands includeRoyal Canin,Hill’s, andPurina. When in doubt, ask your vet for recommendations on what to feed your Crested. Most Chinese Crested adults do well with two meals daily, one in the morning and one in the evening. Chinese Crestedpuppies, however, require more frequent mealsto support their growth and development—about three or four small daily feedings. The amount of food to give your Chinese Cresteds varies based on her age, weight, activity level, health, and the brand of dog food. While you can follow the feeding guidelines on the dog food packaging for portion guidance, it’s also important to get your vet’s input about a feeding regimen tailored specifically to your dog. Awell-balanced and nutritious dietwill meet the nutritional needs of Chinese Cresteds. Do not give your dog supplements unless your vet recommends them. Chinese Cresteds are happy and alert dogs, according to the ACCC. They tend to be friendly toward everyone, even people they’re just meeting. That said, socializing your Chinese Crested puppy early and consistently is important for her to be comfortable in new situations. The Chinese Crested is a dog with some rather cat-like quirks—according to the breed club, the breed is known to perch on the back of couches, much like felines do. But they’re also eager to please their people and form strong bonds with those they love. Cresteds crave attention, and they might get a little needy if they don’t get enough affection. As with all dog breeds, Chinese Crested puppies need early socialization and exposure to new animals, people, and situations. The breed club recommends enrolling your puppy inthe AKC S. Always usepositive reinforcement when trainingyour Chinese Crested. But keep an eye on how many treats you’re giving her, as those calories can add up in a dog so small. Interactive puzzles Short walks Agility training Scent work Dock diving Playing fetch Learning new tricks Gentle tug-of-war Cuddling Though hairless Chinese Cresteds and Chinese Crested powderpuffs have very different grooming needs, both require care that is pretty involved. Hairless dogs need additional care for their exposed skin, and powderpuffs need regular brushing and professional grooming sessions. Hairless Chinese Cresteds have smooth, soft skin that needs a little extra TLC. If your hairless dog spends time in the sun, her skin needs to be protected withdog-safe sunscreenorclothing. You will also need to regularlymoisturize their skinto prevent it from drying out and becoming damaged. A warmsweater or coatmay also be necessary even on relatively mild days. Powderpuff Chinese Cresteds don’t need as much skin care as hairless ones do, but her long locks—a double coat consisting of a soft undercoat and a longer, silky topcoat—do require special attention. As a pet parent, you’ll need to brush your powderpuff at least a few times a week to prevent painful matting. You’ll also need to schedule routine trips to the groomer for a trim when their hair grows too long. Stay vigilant for any changes in your Crested’s eyes, as this can be a sign of a developing eye condition. Stay up to date with yearly wellness exams, and contact your vet if you notice anything amiss, such as redness, cloudiness, ordischarge. The breed can also develop normaltear staining. Wiping your dog’s eyes with adog-safe wipeor damp washcloth will keep their face clean. Keeping your Chinese Crested’s ears cleanand the canals free of debris is essential forpreventing ear infections. Call your vet if you notice any redness or odor in your pup’s ears, as this could be a sign of an infection. Since Chinese Cresteds tend to spend much of their lives indoors, pet parents may find that theyneed to trim their toenailsfrequently. Check your dog’s toenails once a week and trim them back when they start getting a little long. While bringing home any new pet is a long-term commitment, the commitment with a Chinese Crested puppy is longer than most, as this breed regularly lives to be 13–18 years old. Over that long life, you’ll get a loving, affectionate, and quirky companion. But you must keep up with your Crested’s grooming needs, whether she’s a hairless or a powderpuff. Purchasing a Chinese Crested puppy from a reputable breeder can cost several thousand dollars. The breed club provides alist of recommended breedersyou can reach out to. Yes, Chinese Cresteds are high-maintenance when it comes to grooming. The hairless variety needs their skin moisturized and protected from the sun and cold, while Chinese Crested powderpuffs need frequent at-home brushing as well as trips to the groomer. When well-trained and socialized, Chinese Crested dogs make good pets for families, singles, and older adults alike. Featured Image: iStock/Ekaterina Gorokhova WRITTEN BY Erica Vasquez Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians