SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/belgian-malinois

Istock/Sansargo Belgian Malinois are one of the most confident,intelligent, and hard-working dog breeds. These traits can make them phenomenal pets—if they’re in the right household. Belgian Malinois dogs need a dedicated and experienced pet parent who is excited to share an active lifestyle with a four-legged companion. Belgian Malinois werefirst bred near the city of Malines in Belgium, where they got their name. This Belgian dog breed was originally bred to herd, but their trainability and drive led them into several other careers, including police work, search and rescue, and bomb and drug detection. This means that Belgian Malinois do best in a house where they have a job to perform, such asagility, tracking, orobedience. When fully grown, male Belgian Malinois are typically 24–26 inches tall and 60–80 pounds, while females stand about 22–24 inches tall and weigh 40–60 pounds. Belgian Malinois dogs are incredibly loyal and smart, but they’re also high-energy and need a lot of exercise and stimulation. Daily walksare simplynotenough for this breed; instead, Belgian Malinois dogs need high levels of aerobic exercise, like a five-mile run every morning. Belgian Malinois dogs need intensive, long-term training and exercise. This makes them greatrunning,hiking, and biking companions. They’re also excellent at agility, tracking, herding, and obedience competitions. However, when Belgian Malinois don’t get enough exercise ormental stimulation, they often start to exhibit destructive behaviors, creating their own activities to keep themselves entertained. The Belgian Malinois lifespan is typically 10–14 years. Compared to many other breeds, these dogs don’t have a lot of health concerns, especially if they were bred by a responsible breeder. That said, Belgian Malinois are predisposed to a few medical issues. Pet insurance might be a smart investmentwhen you bring home your Belgian Malinois puppy. Belgian Malinois can developelbow dysplasiaandhip dysplasia, both of which are hereditary structural joint conditions. These can cause joint pain andarthritis. Signs to monitor for at home include: Limping with no history of trauma Popping sounds from the joints “Bunny hopping” when running Difficulty standing up Abnormal sitting positions Difficulty getting on or off furniture, going upstairs, and getting into cars Before bringing home a Belgian Malinois puppy, make sure your breeder had the pup’s parents tested for these conditions. If your pet does end up with dysplasia, treatment can range frompain medicationandjoint supplementstosurgery. Belgian Malinois are also predisposed tocataracts, which is a progressive hardening of the eye lens. This causes the eye to become cloudy, eventually leading toblindness. If this does occur, a veterinary ophthalmologist can replace the lens through surgery. The retina is a layer of cells at the back of the eye that allows you to see light, and “atrophy” means wasting away over time. Simply put,progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)causes retina deterioration, leading to blindness. This disease is not painful, so the primary signs are what you may expect in an animal losing their sight, such as bumping into things, difficulty catching treats, or tripping over curbs or stairs. Unfortunately, there is no treatment for PRA, but a good Belgian Malinois breeder will screen your puppy’s parents so the condition doesn’t get passed on to their offspring. Belgian Malinois do best on a high-quality diet that contains a nutritional statement from theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), certifying that it’s a complete and well-balanced diet. Always speak with your vet to discuss thebest dog food for your pup, based on their age, activity level, and individual health. Highly active dogs like the Belgian Malinois generally need a diet high in protein to meet their energy requirements. It’s important to feed your pup a diet appropriate for their age. Puppy foodshould be given until your Malinois is at least 1 year old beforeswitching to adult dog food. Feeding schedules are determined on a dog-by-dog basis. But, in general, Belgian Malinois should be fed twice daily—once in the morning and once in the evening. Belgian Malinoispuppies may need to eat more frequently, up to four times every day. Always talk to your veterinarian to determine what is best for your pet. How much to feed your dogdepends on many factors, including your pup’s age, activity level, and size. The back of the bag may be a good place to start, because it usually has a chart based on current age and weight. Recheck this guide frequently, as Belgian Malinois puppies grow quickly and their calorie needs change. Talk to your veterinarian to determine the right amount of food for your pet. Generally, if your pet is healthy and eating ahigh-quality complete and balanced diet, they shouldn’t neednutritional supplementsunless directed by your veterinarian. Keep in mind thattreats are an important part of traininga Belgian Malinois, but giving too many treats can unbalance their diet and put them at risk for being overweight. In general, treats need to make up no more than 10% of your pup’s total daily calories. Belgian Malinois require constant daily training to help minimize any behavioral issues and keep their mind engaged. Consistent training andsocializationshould start as early as possible and continue throughout their life. This ensures good manners and provides your Malinois with the mental stimulation they need to feel happy and fulfilled. Belgian Malinois are incredibly loyal dogs and tend to form an unbreakable bond with their human. They are not the type of dog that can just be left in the backyard to entertain themselves. Ultimately, they are exceedingly devoted dogs and want nothing more than to spend as much time with you as possible. They are also a very high-energy breed that needs considerable amounts of active engagement, both mentally and physically. Belgian Malinois should get more than 40 minutes of exercise per day—with you by their side. Some activities they love include herding, agility,scent walks, and tracking. When Belgian Malinois don’t get enough exercise or stimulation, they often start to exhibit destructive behaviors, such as: Destroying furniture, rugs, curtains, or plants Chewing personal items, such as shoes Gnawing through doors and window frames, or breaking windows Digging holes in the yard A well-trained and socialized Belgian Malinois can be agreat family dog, but one of their inherent traits is being watchful over their family. While this can certainly have its benefits, it can also make it difficult to have guests or strangers come into the house. Again, training and socialization should begin when your Belgian Malinois puppy is young and continue throughout their life. Belgian Malinois alsohave a high prey drive, making them extremely interested in moving objects. This can lead to your Malinois chasing after cars, other animals, and even children. They may also try to use their herding skills to round up toddlers and children. Always supervise interactions between kids and all dogs, including Malinois. Belgian Malinois are one of thesmartest dog breeds, which makes them eager (and fast!) learners. It’s recommended that Belgian Malinois puppies be trained by a professional who is familiar with the breed. A seasoned trainer will be able to help train your dog for jobs that can stimulate their mind—a critical aspect for this breed. These jobs are often seen as fun activities for them, and it’s important for you to be involved in the training process, as it will increase your pet’s bond with you. Herding Tracking Obedience Sledding Agility Fetch Therapy assistance Unlike some other Belgian dogs, like the long-hairedBelgian Sheepdog, Belgian Malinois pups have a short, waterproof coat, making them easy to care for. They do shed seasonally twice a year, so don’t be surprised if you see more hair on the floor in the fall and spring. This “blowout” of their undercoat typically lasts two to three weeks and helps better prepare their body for the coming season (winter or summer). Belgian Malinois have waterproof coats that protect their skin. Like any dog, they candevelop skin allergies, but this is uncommon. Due to their active lifestyle and love of the outdoors, keep your Belgian dog on year-roundheartworm, flea, and tick prevention. Give your dog a bathas needed to keep them clean after being outdoors. This will also reduce allergen exposure and keep their coat and skin healthy. Dogs should always be bathed indog-specific shampoostailored for their skin and pH, and not human shampoo or body wash products. Simply brushing their coat occasionally with the right dog brushes (a medium-bristle brush or a grooming glove will work) is adequate for keeping your Belgian Malinois healthy. This promotes new hair growth and distributes oils throughout the coat. Belgian Malinois are extremely active dogs who can sustain a scratch to the eye or other injuries. If yourdog’s eyes are redor your pup is rubbing at them, check with your veterinarian. And, given their breed risk for PRA and cataracts, check with your veterinarian immediately if you have concerns about your pet’s vision or noticecloudiness in their eyes. The Belgian Malinois’ ears should be checked monthly forsigns of infection, such as excessive ear wax, redness, and inflammation. For an otherwise healthy Belgian Malinois,clean their ears once a monthwith avet-recommended ear cleaner or ear flush. As with all dogs, a Belgian Malinois’nails should be trimmed regularly. If you hear them clicking on the ground, it’s time to cut them. Like all dogs, the Belgian Malinois needsdaily dental careto keep their teeth and gums free from bacteria, plaque, and tartar. Along withdaily at-home tooth brushing, take your pup in forregular dental cleaningswith your vet. Several things need to be considered before bringing a Belgian Malinois puppy into your home. It’s important to ask yourself a few questions to determine whether this breed is right for you: Are you able to provide this high-energy breed with the physical and mental outlets they need? Are you able to invest in early, consistent training by a professional? Will your dog have a job to do to keep them busy and engaged? If the answer to these questions is yes, you may be ready for this high-energy dog from Belgium. Belgian Malinois are incredible, high-energy animals that can make excellent family dogs in the right household. But these dogs can be the wrong choice for the average household because of their greater-than-average need for mental and physical exercise. Yes, Belgian Malinois are incredibly smart dogs, making them easy to train and highly successful workers. They’re fast and engaged learners, making training not only fun, but critical for their mental well-being. The Belgian Malinois price can vary greatly depending on the dog’s bloodlines, age, and whether your Malinois dog receives specialized training. For dogs that have been trained, the level of training further dictates the cost. On average, a purebred Belgian Malinois puppy with American Kennel Club-registered parents will cost around $2,000–$3,500. However, this can vary widely depending on location and the lineage of the puppy. Belgian Malinois are dogs that look likeGerman Shepherds. Given the similar coat patterns and inherent personality traits that come with herding breeds, it’s easy to see how Belgian Malinois and German Shepherds could be confused with one another. However, there are a few key differences between them. Belgian Malinois were bred in Belgium, while German Shepherds were bred in Germany. Both breeds are similar in height, but Belgian Malinois typically weigh less than German Shepherds. Belgian Malinois typically weigh 40–80 pounds, while German Shepherds can weigh 50–90 pounds. Belgian Malinois colors are fawn with a black mask and ears, with a short coat. German Shepherds have slightly longer fur with a black and tan or black and silver coat and a black saddle of fur over their back. Both breeds are high energy and need a job to do to help stimulate their mind and keep them happy. But, in general, Belgian Malinois tend to have a slightly higher energy level than German Shepherds. Brittany Grenus graduated from Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine in 2018 with her doctorate in veterinary medicine and a. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians