SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/boykin-spaniel

Elise Schmelzer The Boykin Spaniel is an adept hunting dog with roots in the wetlands of South Carolina. A medium-size spaniel breed, the Boykin is known for its friendly, eager-to-please nature, making them equally happy flushing birds and being a family pet. The breed was developed in the 1900s after Whit Boykin’s hunting partner sent him a stray named Dumpy, according toThe Boykin Spaniel Society(BSS). From those humble beginnings, the Boykin Spaniel became the state dog of South Carolina and a reliable partner for hunting turkeys, doves, and ducks. Weighing up to 40 pounds and standing shy of 18 inches at the shoulder, all Boykin Spaniels have a reddish-brown coat, with some having small white markings on their chest. This South Carolinadog breed is an intelligent, amicablepup that loves to swim, hunt, and play. While they have minimal grooming needs and are generally healthy dogs, Boykin Spaniel puppies and dogs thrive in an active family and need “several hours” of exercise and attention every day,according to the BSS. If you can keep up with their energy level, Boykins are easy to train and eager to please. These qualities make them great family dogs who get along well with children and other pets. The Boykin Spaniel Society recommends pet parents ask a veterinarian to performDNA testson their dog to make sure genetic diseases aren’t present. Reputable Boykin Spaniel breeders should also provide health information about any puppy’s parents. Exercise-induced collapseis a genetic neuromuscular disorder where otherwise healthy dogs can become weak after intense exercise. Dogs experiencing an episode have sudden muscle weakness, lack of coordination, and may collapse after 5–25 minutes of intense physical activity. Symptoms of an episode include dragging hind legs or the sudden inability to move the front legs. In severe cases, episodes may be fatal, but with proper management, dogs can live full and healthy lives. Some Boykin Spaniels can be susceptible todegenerative myelopathy, a condition that causes increasing weakness in the back legs. The disease slowly destroys nerves in the spinal cord and can eventually lead to paralysis of the hind legs. Although degenerative myelopathy is not painful, there is currently no cure for the nerve damage. The condition generally begins in middle or older age, and symptoms include dragging paws and wobbly walking. Pulmonic stenosisis a congenital heart defect that affects many large and medium-size breeds, including the Boykin Spaniel. While mild cases are unlikely to have any significant impact on a dog’s life, those with more severe defects can experience difficulties in exercising, may collapse, and may develop heart arrhythmias or heart failure. In some cases, the defect can be treated with surgery. Feed your Boykin Spaniel pup a high-quality dog foodapproved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)to ensure their diet is nutritious and balanced. Popular brands that meet these standards includePurina®,Royal Canin®/MD, andHill’s Science Diet. When selecting a brand, be sure to choose a food specifically formulated for your Boykin Spaniel’s current life stage, whether it’s puppy, adult, or senior. Boykin Spanielpuppies should be fed three meals a dayuntil they are approximately 1 year old. During this period, they shouldtransition from puppy food to adult foodand begin eating two meals per day. For both Boykin Spaniel puppies and adults, mealtimes should be consistent, as this helps create a stable routine for your pet. A Boykin Spaniel eats approximately 2 cups of dry food per day, according tothe Boykin Spaniel Club and Breeders Association of America. However, the actual amount may vary based on the dog’s exercise level and the quality of the food. Dogs who hunt all day will need more calories to keep up with their high level of activity. Always talk to your veterinarian about how much you should be feeding your dog to keep them healthy andprevent obesity. Boykins generally don’t need supplements as long as they are healthy and are being fed high-quality food. Never start your dog on a supplement without speaking to your vet first. Boykin Spaniels—especially Boykin puppies, require several hours of exercise and attention from their family every day. They are bred for long hunting days and possess excellent stamina. While not all Boykins are hyperactive, the BSS recommends assessing the energy levels of a Boykin Spaniel pup’s parents to get an idea of how much energy they may have. But even the calmer Boykins are no couch potatoes, so be prepared totake your dog on daily walksand hikes. They also enjoy swimming, and their webbed toes make them adept in the water. Friendly and loving, the Boykin is an easygoing dog who loves to please their family. But if these athletic dogs don’t get enough exercise andmental stimulation, they can turn to destructive behaviors like chewing or digging to keep themselves entertained. Boykins are generally easy to train and thrive while learning new tricks and commands. Like all dogs, theyrespond best to positive reinforcementand a consistent training schedule tolearn the basics like “sit”and “stay. ” If you’re looking for your Boykin Spaniel to be more than a family pet and join you in the hunting field, you may choose to hire a professional trainer to mold your pup into a hunting pro. Hunting Hiking Swimming Obedience tests Agility trials Retrieving Dock diving The Boykin Spaniel’s brown coat sheds moderately and needs to be brushed regularly. But other than that, these hardy hunting dogs don’t need a ton of upkeep—unless they’ve recently gone swimming, that is. Boykins can be susceptible to skin irritation and infections if they’re not properly dried after going for a swim. To prevent moisture from becoming trapped in their fur, the breed club recommends keeping your pup’s coat trimmed shorter during the summer. This summer cut will help them dry faster. The Boykin Spaniel’s coat is medium in length, with flat or moderately curly fine hair. The breed club recommends brushing your Boykin’s coat at least once a week to minimize shedding and prevent matting. Boykins can also bebathed up to once a month, but any more frequent bathing could lead to an unhealthy, dried-out coat. Boykins don’t require any specific eye care, but pet parents should be sure to keep excess hair around the eyes trimmed and clear of debris or discharge. Contact your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes. Boykins, like other spaniels, can be prone to chronicear infections. A weeklyflushing of your pup’s earswith apet-friendly cleaning solutioncan help keep their ears clean, especially for dogs who regularly swim or hunt in tall grass. Keeping your Boykin Spaniel’s hair around their ears trimmed can also help prevent moisture from becoming trapped, which can cause infections. Boykins make excellent family pets when provided with the resources they need to thrive, including ample space to run, proper attention, and consistent training. Although they can be high-energy, they are easily entertained and trained. Their coat, eyes, and ears require a medium level of care. Yes, Boykins make excellent family dogs. They love attention and being part of a group. While most Boykin Spaniels are energetic, properly trained dogs who are given adequate exercise and attention should behave well. A Boykin Spaniel can cost up to $1,000, depending on the breeder. You can also find dogs atBoykin Spaniel rescuesfor less. Featured Image: Adobe/Jonathan WRITTEN BY Elise Schmelzer Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians