SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/australian-stumpy-tail-cattle-dog

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs aren’tAustralian Cattle Dogswho’ve lost their tails. In fact, not all Stumpies even have “stumps” for tails. The two breeds share common ancestors, but Stumpies are an entirely distinct breed that joined the American Kennel Club’s Foundation Stock Service in 2018. Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs are typically short on tail length but not on energy, intelligence, or determination. Thought to be the first breed developed Down Under, the Stumpy’s origins date back to the 1840s when local working dogs were crossed with imported ones to create what theAustralian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog Society of the United Statescalls “the epitome of a working dog. ” According to the breed club, Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs have served as herding, search-and-rescue, service, therapy, police, and military dogs—though they don’t need an official “job” to thrive. The Stumpy may be the epitome of a working dog, but they also require some work from their pet parents. Even the breed club is quick to note that the dogs aren’t the right fit for every family. Stumpy families will need to provide their dog with a job, though it doesn’t have to be in an official capacity. Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs havechart-topping smartsand stamina, so daily physical exercise andmental stimulationis an absolute must. While Stumpies aren’t always outwardly affectionate, they are loyal, obedient companions. The breed club describes them as “Velcro dogs” because they prefer to be close to their people. Strangers, however, are another story. While every Stumpy is different, most need time to warm up to people they don’t know. Socializing your Stumpy puppycan help make them more comfortable around new people. Stumpies are best suited for older children who can safely interact with such a fearless, high-energy pup and in homes where they can be the only dog. The Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog is a generallyhealthy dog breedwith a lifespan of 12–15 years, but like all dogs, they’re predisposed to certain health conditions. Stumpies are prone to congenitaldeafness(present at birth), which can affect one or both ears. TheBAER (brainstem auditory evoked response) testcan definitively confirm deafness in your pup, but there isn’t a cure. Still, with some accommodations and training, dogs with hearing loss can live a long, happy life with relative normalcy. Hip dysplasiais a condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly. It’s characterized by a looseness that leads toosteoarthritisif left untreated. Mild cases are treated with interventions likephysical therapyandanti-inflammatory drugs, while severe cases may requiresurgery. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to get up or jump Shifting of weight to front legs Loss of muscle mass in back legs Similar to hip dysplasia,elbow dysplasiarefers to an elbow joint that hasn’t developed as it should. It’s one of the most common causes of osteoarthritis in canine elbows. Anti-inflammatory drugs can help with the pain and inflammation, but surgery is recommended before osteoarthritis develops. Common signs of elbow dysplasia include: Limping, especially after exercise Reluctance or unwillingness to walk or exercise Stiffness in the elbow joint Grating or crackling sound from the elbow joint Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is when the rods and cones within a dog’s eye break down, leading to vision loss. Signs of disease include: A reluctance to enter dark spaces Clumsiness Dilated pupils that constrict slowly in response to light Eyes that are more reflective in the dark Cataracts There’s no cure for PRA, and the condition eventually leads toblindness in dogs. Primary lens luxation (PLL)is a condition in which the lens of the eye moves out of its normal position. It can happen in one or both eyes, and affected dogs may haveeyes that are red, teary,cloudy, and painful. PLL can also cause inflammation andglaucoma, and it can progress to blindness if left untreated. If caught early, surgically removing the lens can be helpful. Topical and oral medications can also help manage pain and discomfort. Your veterinarian can help you choosethe best dog foodfor your Stumpy. The food you select should: Meet theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards Be formulated for your dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior) Be nutritionally complete for your dog’s lifestyle, size, and health. Because Stumpies are so active, a performance or sport diet, such asPurina Pro Plan Sport Performance Dog Food, may be a good fit. Most adult Stumpies should eat two meals a day: once in the morning and again in the evening. Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog puppies, however, have a higher metabolism and may need three or four meals a day. Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your dog. To determine how much to feed your Stumpy, do two things: Look at thenutrition label on your dog’s food bag. This provides a general idea of how many calories your dog needs, based on their weight. They can make a personalized recommendation based on your individual pup’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Know thatdog treatscontain calories, and treats shouldn’t make up more than 10% of your dog’s daily diet. Be sure to factor them into your overall feeding plan. Your Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog should receive all the nutrients they need from eating a dog food that meets AAFCO standards. However, your veterinarian may recommend nutritional supplements to treat or manage various health issues, such asjoint supplementsfor hip dysplasia. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, however, including supplements. Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs were bred to work, and they still need a job regardless of whether they live on an actual working ranch. These are alert, loyal, brave dogs with a seemingly endless supply of energy. Safe outlets for exercising their brain and body are imperative. Stumpies prefer to be close to their people, but can be wary of strangers and other dogs. Bored, lonely Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dogs with energy to spare are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors, such aschewingandbarking. All outdoor exercise should occur on a leash or within a securely fenced area. Otherwise, your Stumpy may follow their working and herding instincts into danger. Begin socializing andtraining your Australian Stumpy Tail puppyas soon as you bring them home. Socialization involves introducing your puppy to new animals, people, environments, activities, and objects, with a goal of helping them feel more comfortable in new situations throughout their life. Ask your vet for age-appropriate socialization and training ideas. Stumpies are smart, eager-to-please training pupils who enjoy flexing their brain muscles. Like all dogs, they respond best to aconsistent, positive, rewards-based approach. Training is also a great way to provide your Stumpy with fun mental enrichment and physical exercise while building the crucial human-animal bond. Jogging Walking Hiking Backpacking Obedience training Skills training Stumpies sport short, double coats that can be blue, red, mottled, or speckled. Though their grooming is fairly minimal, the breed sheds regularly, and hair loss ramps up twice a year when they lose their undercoat. If your Stumpy spends a lot of time outdoors, regularly check them for burrs and other debris that can get stuck in their fur and irritate their skin. And even withyear-round flea and tick prevention, it’s important to regularlyscan their skin for ticks. The Stumpy’s coat isn’t prone to matting, but it does shed. Regular brushingcan help corral stray hairs, and you’ll likely need to increase your brushing routine when undercoat shedding picks up during the spring and fall. How often your Stumpy needs a bath depends on their lifestyle. Talk to your veterinarian about how often tobathe your dog, and always use adog-friendly shampoo. Stumpies are prone to several eye issues. Call your veterinarian if you notice signs of disease, such as redness,discharge, cloudiness, or apparent vision changes. Stumpies aren’t prone to ear problems, but be sure to call your vet if you notice signs of anear infection, such as redness, swelling, discharge, and odor. Ask your vet if you need toclean your dog’s earsand whichear cleanerto use. Here are some questions to consider before adding an Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog to your family: Do I live in a home without very small children or other dogs? Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with daily mental and physical exercise? Can I keep a dog on a leash or within a fenced area when outdoors? Am I home enough to provide a “Velcro dog” with close companionship? Do I have the skills and patience to provide early socialization and lifelong training using positive reinforcement? Am I OK with fur on my furniture and clothes? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 15 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Stumpy. Though they are very similar in appearance, job, and origin story, the Australian Cattle Dog and Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog are different breeds. Australian Cattle Dogs have a long tail and can feature tan markings in their coats; Stumpies have neither. Moreover, Australian Cattle Dogs have a rectangular body, while Stumpies are square, making their legs appear longer. The Stumpy’s ears are also higher set and more upright in orientation. The Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog has a lifespan of 12–15 years. Featured image courtesy of Lori Graham of the Australian Stumpy Tail Cattle Dog of the US WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians