SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/glen-imaal-terrier

Erica Puisis CaptureLight/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images The Glen of Imaal Terrier dog breed originated in Ireland as a hearty and stout worker and companion. TheseIrish dogswere primarily relied upon for hunting vermin, but they also chased out larger animals like badgers and foxes, says theGlen of Imaal Terrier Association(GOITA). Although not as well-known as some other Irish terriers, like theSoft Coated Wheaten Terrieror theKerry Blue Terrier, these dogs are an intelligent and docile breed with a devoted following. An adult Glen of Imaal Terrier is about 14 inches tall at the shoulder and weighs 32–40 pounds. The breed’s body structure is unique; the dogs are longer than they are tall, with slightly bowed front legs. TheGlen of Imaal Terrier Club of America(GITCA) says these dogs should “give the impression of great substance for [their] size. ” A Glen of Imaal Terrier is a compact dog with a big personality. The breed is known for being inquisitive, clever, and affectionate. These dogs are active with moderate energy levels. “Glens are ready for action when the [pet parent] wants togo for a hikeor walk, but also have an off switch and should be able to settle and relax on the couch,” says Kelli Whitfield, GITCA member and Glen of Imaal Terrier pet parent. Compared to otherterrier breeds, the Glen of Imaal Terrier has a calmer disposition that is sometimes described as stoic. If you can provide a Glen with enough exercise for the mind and body and consistent training, you’ll have an excellent companion for life’s adventures. Glen of Imaal Terriers usually have a lifespan of 10–15 years. They’re ahealthy dog breedthat isn’t known for encountering many major health problems. Like all dog breeds, though, there are some health concerns to be aware of, and theGITCA requires breeding dogs to be testedfor hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia, and progressive retinal atrophy. Ask a prospective breeder to share the results of these tests before committing to a puppy. The most common joint problems for a Glen of Imaal Terrier arehip dysplasiaandelbow dysplasia. Hip dysplasia is when the hip joint doesn’t fit together properly. Elbow dysplasia is a similar condition, caused by the elbow not developing correctly. Both conditions causearthritis, pain, and mobility problems as a dog ages. Medication can help reduce pain-causing inflammation, and promote joint and cartilage health. Weight management can also help reduce the load on your dog’s joints and improve mobility. Progressive retinal atrophyaffects the light-sensitive cells at the back of the retina. It’s a degenerative disease without a cure and causes eventual blindness. PRA is genetic in Glen of Imaal Terriers, but affected dogs can still live long and normal lives with help from their pet parents. Breeders should also genetically test their dogs to avoid passing the condition onto puppies. When deciding on thebest dog food for a Glen of Imaal Terrier, you should pick a high-quality formula that is appropriate for your dog’s life stage. Puppiesandsenior dogshave different nutritional needs than adult dogs at their peak of activity and health, so their food should be different. All food must meet the nutritional guidelines for your dog’s life stage set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). You’ll find this certification on the dog food’s packaging. Most adult dogs need to eat twice per day, in the morning and in the evening. Glen of Imaal Terrier puppies typically benefit from more frequent meals to preventhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Work with your vet to create a feeding schedule that makes sense for your dog. If your dog eats too quickly, consider using aslow feeder bowlor apuzzle feeder. This will slow them down and provide much-neededmental stimulationduring mealtimes. To determinehow much to feed your dog, use the feeding chart on your dog food packaging. This chart indicates the total daily portion of food for your dog based on their weight. If you need more specific guidance or notice your dog gaining or losing weight, consult your veterinarian. A vet will factor your dog’s lifestyle, age, and health into their feeding recommendations. A healthy Glen of Imaal Terrier fed a nutritionally complete dog food isn’t likely to need supplements. If you have health concerns you’d like to address with a supplement, ask your veterinarian for recommendations. Nevergive your dog a supplementwithout speaking to your vet first. In general, the Glen of Imaal Terrier dog breed is known for being active and engaged with their pet parents. Although these dogs have a docile temperament at home, they do require an outlet for physical exertion and mental stimulation. Fortunately, they’re game for many different activities, including awalk around the neighborhood, or more specific training fordog sports or competition. It’s not hard to find an activity you and your Glen will enjoy doing together. Their playful energy means Glen of Imaal Terriers can be a good dog for families with children, though interactions between kids and dogs must be supervised. “They adore children, but care has to be taken,” says Anne Hardy, GOITA secretary. “As a hefty dog, they can bowl over a young child in their enthusiasm and inadvertently hurt them. ” For households with other pets,early socializationis key for Glen of Imaal Terrier puppies because of the breed’sprey drive. “Since Glens are terriers and were bred to rid farms of vermin, it may be a challenge to have Glens with small rodents, cats, or similar pets,” Whitfield says. Glen of Imaal Terriers are known for being curious, so caution is recommended in unfamiliar situations. Keep them secure in a fenced yard or on a leash so they don’t chase small critters that catch their eye, like squirrels. Unlike a lot of terriers, this breed is typically a quiet companion. In fact, the Glen of Imaal Terrier was specifically bred for this trait, and thebreed standardeven describes these dogs as silent while working. That being said, a Glen of Imaal Terrier willbark on occasion. When it comes to training a Glen of Imaal Terrier, it’s important to be consistent and flexible. “Due to the independent nature of terriers, owners need to be prepared to work with a thinking dog who may have his own ideas about how things should go,” Whitfield says. Figure out what motivates your Glen and engage their mind, as thesedogs are very smartand capable of problem-solving. It’s also helpful to remember the breed’s historical origins during training. “Glens were used to dispatch badgers and work independent of the [pet parent], unlike a herding breed like aBorder Colliethat is bred to work with the handler,” says Whitfield. With that in mind, don’t be surprised if your initial request to a Glen is met with resistance. Hardy says consistency, repetition, and a high-value reward is important in training sessions. Positive reinforcementis the best approach. Obedience Agility Earthdog Barn hunt Nose work Tracking Walking Hiking The Glen of Imaal Terrier sports a weather-resistant double coat that consists of a soft undercoat and a coarse outer coat. This dog breed requires moderate grooming, but with the early training and appropriate techniques, it can be easily managed. The coarse outer coat found on a Glen of Imaal Terrier does an excellent job of protecting the dog’s skin from exposure to the elements and dirt. This breed doesn't require frequent bathing, and you only need togive your dog a bathwhen they become very dirty or smelly. It’s important to brush a Glen of Imaal Terrier multiple times a week. “They do not molt, so they need regular combing tostop the undercoat [from] matting,” Hardy says. With that in mind, you should establish a regular routine of brushing these dogs from an early age so they readily accept the grooming process. When used correctly and regularly, an undercoat rake or a comb can capture dead hair from the soft undercoat and prevent mats, which are painful for your pet and difficult to remove. Aside from regular brushing to maintain the undercoat, a Glen of Imaal Terrier will need occasional specialized attention for the harsh outer coat. “Like most double-coated terriers, Glens should be hand-stripped,” Whitfield says. “Hand stripping involves removing the dead outer coat over time by hand. ” It’s important that you don’t trim the coat with scissors or shave it, as doing so can cause damage. The Glen of Imaal Terrier doesn’t require specific eye care, but be vigilant about the health of your dog’s eyes. As you’re petting or grooming your dog, examine their eyes for signs of infection or injury, likeredness,discharge,cloudiness, or swelling. Contact your veterinarian immediately if you notice these symptoms or changes in your pet’s vision. The folded ears of a Glen Terrier can conceal dirt or debris, so you should clean the ears regularly while grooming your dog. In addition,dog ear infectionsare not uncommon, especially if the ear isn’t sufficiently dried after a bath or swimming session. Check andclean your dog’s earsfrequently and look for signs of infection, like odor, redness, discharge, or pain. Contact your veterinarian if you notice changes to the health of your dog’s ears. A Glen of Imaal Terrier thrives in an active home with close human companionship. These dogs enjoy the company of children and adults alike, but it’s important to have an accurate idea of how strong these dogs are. In addition, these dogs require positive reinforcement-based training or they’ll quickly resort to their own schemes. With the right training and attention, these dogs are great partners for anyone looking for a partner in outdoor activities or dog sports. With a generally calm and quiet disposition but a streak of silliness, a Glen of Imaal Terrier can make an excellent pet for an active family. Not many Glen of Imaal Terrier puppies are born each year, so the breed remains rare. Whitfield attributes this to the fact that there aren’t many Glen of Imaal breeders in the U. Glen of Imaal Terriers are very intelligent but independent. Those traits make them highly trainable but not necessarily easy to train. The best results come from training a Glen of Imaal Terrier from an early age. Seek out the assistance of a trainer if you need help instilling good habits for your dog and establishing a positive working relationship. WRITTEN BY Erica Puisis Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians