SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/wirehaired-vizsla

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Adobe_stock/BabettsBildergalerie The Wirehaired Vizsla (veez-luh) is a smart, sensitive, sporty dog with a relatively recent history. Hunters and falconers developed the Wirehaired Vizsla dog breed in Hungary in the 1930s by selectively crossingVizslaswithGerman Wirehaired Pointers. The goal, according to thebreed standard, was to create “a sturdy, versatilehunting dogable to withstand harsh winters in the field, forest, and water. ” The resulting Wirehaired Vizsla dog is indeed sturdy. The breed standard describes them as “robust and lean” and notes that their movement is “powerful yet graceful, with far-reaching drive enabling the breed to hunt in all elements and cover any terrain encountered by the walking hunter. ” Medium in size, the Hungarian Wirehaired Vizsla dog weighs 45–65 pounds and stands up to 25 inches tall. But what instantly makes the breed stand out is their characteristic golden rust, weather-resistant wire coat and their endearingly bushy eyebrows and beard. Wirehaired Vizslas may have been made for hunting, but that doesn’t mean they can’t makeexcellent family dogs, too—especially if their family understands that they need two things in abundance: exercise and companionship. Wirehaired Vizslas top the charts when it comes to energy and love of play. In other words, families who can’t commit to providing dailymental stimulationand physical exercise need not apply. But because thesedogs have a very high prey driveand can follow their powerful noses into trouble, all exercise should be either on a leash or within a securely fenced area. With enough outdoor playtime, Wirehaired Vizsla dogs are content and calm indoors. And while you’ll experience regular shedding if you add a Wirehaired Vizsla to your home (especially when they lose their dense undercoat twice a year), their grooming is otherwise minimal. Wirehaired Vizslas aregenerally healthy dogswith a life expectancy of 12–14 years. Still, like all breeds, they are prone to certain health issues. Hyperuricosuria (HUU)causes elevated levels of uric acid in a dog’s urine. Affected dogs are predisposed to formingbladder stonesand sometimeskidney stones. These stones can be difficult to treat and often require surgery. Dogs predisposed to HUU may require management with a special diet. When a dog’s hip joint doesn’t develop properly, it can result in a loose-fitting joint (hip dysplasia). Management for mild cases involves weight loss,physical therapy, supplements, special diets, andanti-inflammatory medications, but severe cases may requirecorrective surgery. Hip dysplasia can lead toarthritisif left untreated. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to navigate stairs, get up, or jump Shifting weight to the front legs Loss of muscle mass in back legs Hip pain Elbow dysplasiadescribes an elbow joint that hasn’t developed correctly, and it’s one of the most common causes of osteoarthritis in dogs’ elbows. Anti-inflammatory medication can help with pain and inflammation, but your vet may ultimately recommend surgery to treat this condition. Common signs of elbow dysplasia include: Limping, especially after exercise Reluctance or unwillingness to walk or exercise Stiffness in the elbow joint Grating or crackling sound when elbow joint is moved Subaortic valvular stenosis (SAS)is a genetic heart condition that hinders blood flow from the heart to the rest of the body. This makes the heart work harder, negatively affecting a dog’s health. Dogs with this condition may not show visible symptoms, but some may be weak, havedifficulty breathing, orfaint. Treatment involves medication and exercise restriction to prevent straining the heart. Hungarian Wirehaired Vizsla dogs may develop eye conditions later in life, including: Glaucoma:a disease where pressure builds up in the eye, leading to pain, optic nerve damage andblindness. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA):a family of eye disorders in which the eye’s retina slowly deteriorates, leading to blindness. Cataracts:a condition where the eye’s lens becomes cloudy and hinders vision; this can be corrected with surgery. Work with your veterinarian tochoose the best dog foodand feeding plan for your pet. A vet can recommend a food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards and is nutritionally complete for your pet’s life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior), size, lifestyle, and health. Most adult Wirehaired Vizsla dogs do well eating two meals a day: once in the morning and again in the evening. Wirehaired Vizsla puppies have a higher metabolism and may need three feedings per day (morning, midday, evening). Work with your vet to create the best feeding schedule for your dog as they age. Your AAFCO-compliant dog food packaging will include guidance forhow much to feed your dogbased on their size. This is a great starting point, but the best advice comes from your vet, so always ask them if you’re feeding your dog the right amount. Be mindful of how manydog treatsyou give your Wirehaired Vizsla. Treats should never make up more than 10% of a dog's daily calories. If your Wirehaired Vizsla is eating a complete and balanced dog food that’s AAFCO-compliant, they’ll receive all needed nutrients. But your vet may recommenddog supplementsto treat or prevent specific health conditions. For example,joint supplements may help dogswith hip or elbow dysplasia. Always talk to your veterinarian before adding supplements to your dog’s diet. Wirehaired Vizslas were born to work. However, the hunting breed can adjust well to the life of a family pet, as they’re loyal, affectionate, andsmart dogs. But keep in mind: The energy that serves them well on the job won’t simply go away because they’ve traded hunting fields for family life. Potential families must be prepared to provide their energetic Wirehaired Vizsla with lots of exercise and attention. Wirehaired Vizslas love people and are gentle enough to play with children, but their hunting instincts could cause problems with other pets that could be mistaken for things to chase. Their high prey drive also means that all outdoor play must be either on a leash or within a fenced area. Wirehaired Vizslas need exercise and companionship. Bored, lonely dogs with energy to spare are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors likeexcess barking. They may also experienceseparation anxiety, thoughproper socializationand a lifestyle that doesn’t keep you away from home for long periods can help this issue. It’s important to safely expose Wirehaired Vizsla puppies to different animals, people, environments, and objects during their first 16 weeks of life. This socialization helps dogs be well-behaved, comfortable, and confident in different settings as they age. Talk to your Wirehaired Vizsla breeder about how they approach socialization, and ask your veterinarian about socialization activities that are safe for your pet’s age. When training, keep sessions varied to hold your Wirehaired Vizsla’s attention. And while all dogs respond best to positive, rewards-based training, this approach is especially important for the smart and eager-to-please Wirehaired Vizsla. Positive reinforcement trainingbuilds the human-animal bond, while also providing dogs with crucially important mental and physical exercise. Long walks Jogging Hiking Swimming Hunting Obedience training Skills training Nose work Considering that the Wirehaired Vizsla was bred in part for their coat, it should come as no surprise that their fur is both protective and easy to care for. But while brushing needs are minimal, be prepared for some shedding. If your Wirehaired Vizsla spends a lot of time outdoors,check for ticks, twigs, burrs, and other nuisances that can get caught in their fur and irritate their skin. Pay attention for signs of skin irritation, and reach out to your vet if you notice anything out of the ordinary. TheWirehaired Vizsla Club of America (WVCA)notes that coats within the breed can vary dramatically, with some dogs exhibiting little to no wire texture. Others, according to the club, may have a very wooly coat. Your exact grooming routine depends on the coat your dog inherits, but you can generally expect to provide regular brushing (a few times throughout the week) to reduce shedding. Some dogs may also benefit from stripping their old, dead undercoat to allow for coarser hair to grow back. Bathing frequency depends, in part, on your dog’s lifestyle. Keep in mind that too many baths can strip the skin of healthy oils, so ask your veterinarianhow often bathing is needed. Wirehaired Vizslas are prone to several eye conditions, so contact your veterinarian as soon as possible if you notice signs likeredness,discharge, orcloudiness. A Wirehaired Vizsla’ bushy eyebrows can also cause eye irritation if they become too shaggy. Occasionally trimming your dog’s eyebrows may be necessary. Clean your dog’s earsafter they’ve been in water (such as after a swim or bath) to preventear infections. Ask your vet if a regular ear cleaning schedule is appropriate for your Wirehaired Vizsla and whichear-cleaning productsto use. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Wirehaired Vizsla to your family: Do I have the time and energy to provide a smart, intelligent dog with mental and physical exercise multiple times each day? Can I keep a dog either on a leash or within a securely fenced yard when exercising them outdoors? Do I live in a home without small animals that could be mistaken for something to chase? Do I have the knowledge and skills to provide a dog with extensive socialization and positive training? Am I home enough to give a dog close companionship every day? Am I OK with fur on my furniture and clothes? Am I financially prepared to provide regular veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 14 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Wirehaired Vizsla. Yes, Wirehaired Vizslas shed their fur regularly, and the shedding increases twice a year when they lose their undercoat in the spring and fall. Extra brushing andlint rollingcan help keep things under control. No dog is truly hypoallergenic, including Wirehaired Vizslas. They shed a moderate amount, which could trigger the allergies of sensitive family members. The cost of a Wirehaired Vizsla puppy varies by breeder, but generally expect to pay $1,500–$2,000. The Wirehaired Vizsla Club of America maintains alist of breederswho have signed the WVCA Code of Ethics and have been members in good standing for at least two years. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians