SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/sealyham-terrier

Sarah Kloepple Sealyham Terriers hail from the fields of Wales. Their name derives from the Welsh estate of retired army captain John Edwardes, who first bred them for hunting badgers, foxes, and otters. The Sealyham’s first recorded show appearance was in 1903 at a local competition in Wales, and the breed was first introduced to the U. in 1911, according to theAmerican Sealyham Terrier Club (ASTC). Sealys are brave, spunky, and curious, like allterrier dogs, but they’re also known to be more biddable. They’re also known for theirunique white coat—the color was intentional to separate them from their prey—that features a long, water-resistant undercoat. Sealyham Terriers are short, stout, and sturdy; they can stand up to 10 inches tall and weigh up to 24 pounds. Sealyham Terriers are affectionate, inquisitive, confident, and described as “delightful clowns” by the ASTC. They’re devoted to their humans, and can makegreat family dogsthanks to their friendly and loveable temperament. Like all terriers, Sealyhamslove to bark, track, anddig, which can be a nuisance to some pet parents. Training with positive reinforcementcan help reduce unwanted behaviors. Their grooming can be more involved than most breeds; Sealyham Terrier dogs have a double coat that requires regular brushing toprevent matting. But brushing alone isn’t enough—the coat should also be trimmed and stripped every so often. Sealyham Terriers have a lifespan of 12–14 years and are usually avery healthy dog breed. But there are some health issues to be aware of. Terrier breeds are prone toprimary lens luxation. PLL is when the eye lens moves out of its normal position. This can cause pressure to build up in the eye, eventually leading to painfulglaucomaandblindness. Symptoms of PLL include: Excessive tearing and blinking Rubbing at the face Asymmetrical pupils Red discoloration to the eye A blue color on the eye’s surface Contact your vet if you notice changes in your Sealyham Terrier’s eyes. Although it’s more common in older dogs,deafness in dogscan happen at any age and for several reasons. Sealyham Terrier puppies can be born deaf, usually due to defects in the inner ear. This is the most common cause of deafness in dogs, but it can only be reliably diagnosed in puppies older than 4 weeks old. Veterinarians can diagnose deafness through a physical exam. Diagnostic testing such asblood workand imaging techniques can be helpful to find a possible underlying cause for a dog’s deafness. With a few adjustments, deaf dogs can live long and relatively normal lives. Work with your veterinarian to develop a feeding plan for your Sealyham Terrier that’snutritionally complete and balancedfor your pup’s age, weight, and health. Your vet can direct you to formulas that meet nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Sealyham puppies should eat apuppy-specific dog foodbeforetransitioning to an adult formulaat around 1 year of age. Sealyham Terrier puppies can have high metabolisms and need frequent meals (about three or four a day) to preventlow blood sugar. Full-grown Sealys can be fed less frequently—typically two or three times a day. Ask your vet about the best feeding schedule for your dog. A dog’s exact calorie requirements depend on their age, health, lifestyle, and other factors. Sealyham Terriers are asmall dog breed, and it’s important tokeep them at a healthy weightto avoid joint and metabolic issues as they age. Follow the portion recommendations on your dog food’s packaging, and work with your vet to adjust that guidance to fit your dog, if needed. Dogs that eat an AAFCO-compliant dog food should receive all the nutrients they need. But your veterinarian may prescribe certaindog supplementsdepending on your Sealyham Terrier’s health. Talk to your veterinarian if you have concerns about your dog’s nutrition, and never give your pet a supplement without a vet’s oversight. Because of their original purpose as hunters, Sealys can be active and outgoing dogs. It’s not uncommon to find them digging or hear them barking; they also have a strongprey driveand love to chase other animals. Early socializationand training your Sealyham Terrier puppy are vital for this breed to be well-mannered. Sealyhams can do well with cats and other dogs when socialized at a young age. They are also loyal to their humans and tend to do well with children, so long as youngerchildren know how to interact with pets. Sealyham Terriers are confident, spunky, and natural leaders. They enjoy investigating andgoing on walks, but because of their tendency for chasing other animals, you must always keep them on a leash. Be sure to give your Sealy plenty ofmental stimulationand physical exercise to get out any pent-up energy. Sealyham Terriers can be independent thinkers, and training will require patience and consistency. Keeping training sessions short and fun, as if you’re playing a game, is a good way to engage your Sealy. Always use positive reinforcement methods, andbegin training your puppyas soon as you bring them home. Agility Obedience training Nose work Short walks Playing with toys Sealys are known for their unique coat, which requires involved upkeep. The official breed club offers adetailed grooming guidefor Sealyham Terrier pet parents to follow. Sealyham Terriers don’t require special skin care outside of the occasional bath. Ask your veterinarianhow often you should bathe your dog. Coat care is extremely important for a Sealyham Terrier, especially if you plan to show your dog. Sealys have two parts to their coat: a coarse, wiry outercoat and a finer, softer undercoat. They don’t typically shed much, but you still need tobrush your dogmultiple times a week to prevent matting. The Sealy coat also requires hand stripping (a process where fur is removed at the root instead of clipped) and shaping to stimulate healthy circulation in the skin and initiate new coat growth. This may need to be done by a professional groomer. Sealys are also recognizable for the hair that grows forward on their forehead. While it’s a distinct look, if left untrimmed it can hinder their eyesight. In addition, schedule a vet appointment if you notice signs of eye trouble like redness,cloudiness, or pain. Sealyham Terriers have medium-sized slightly rounded ears. Ask your veterinarian for tips on how to safelyclean your pet’s earsto preventear infections. A vet can recommend a consistent cleaning schedule andear-cleaning products to use. If you noticesigns of an ear infection(redness, swelling, pain, or bad odor), make a vet appointment. Consider yourself lucky if you end up welcoming a Sealyham Terrier into your home. They’re amiable, loving dogs that have become a rare breed. But they’re not a good fit for every family. Sealyham Terriers need pet parents who are dedicated to consistent grooming and training. Like all dogs, Sealys also need daily mental stimulation, exercise, and play. Expect to have a lively and loud dog. For those ready to take on the responsibility of a terrier breed—and who don’t mind the barking and digging that comes with a terrier—Sealyhams can be wonderful companions. Sealys can be wonderful pets that can thrive anywhere fromcity apartmentsto country estates, if given the right care. They are known to be friendly, affectionate terriers that are loyal to their humans. Yes, Sealys are known to bark, as are most other terrier breeds. But unwanted behavior can be curbed by regular training exercises and by keeping them physically and mentally active. Because of their rarity, you may pay up to $3,000 for a Sealyham Terrier puppy. The exact price depends on where you live, the dog’s pedigree, and the breeder. WRITTEN BY Sarah Kloepple Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians