SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/manchester-terrier

Zack Newman Dopeyden/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images Manchester Terriers have ancient roots, tracing back to the 1570s in the Manchester district of England. As the oldest identifiableterrier breed, according to theAmerican Manchester Terrier Club (AMTC), Manchesters were initially desired because of their skills as ratters and hunters. Today, they’re most commonly seen as family pets. Loving andintelligent, Manchester Terriers are low-maintenance and mostly require the classic hallmarks of pet parenthood. The breed needs regular exercise every day, but once their energy is spent, they love to get cozy with their family members. Manchester Terriers have a smooth, short coat that requires minimal upkeep. The breed can beprone to barkinganddigging behaviorsthanks to their terrier nature, but some of these instincts can be managed with proper training and behavior modification. They can also have ahigh prey drivebecause of their history as ratters, so always supervise your dog when they’re outside so they don’t run off after a squirrel. The standard Manchester Terrier size is 15–16 inches tall and 12–22 pounds. There’s also a smallerToy Manchester Terrier, sometimes called a Miniature Manchester Terrier, which is considered a separate breed. Manchester Terriers are considered arelatively healthy breed, according to theCanadian Manchester Terrier Club (CMTC). However, like all dogs, Manchester Terriers are predisposed to some health conditions. Pet insurance could be a good investmentwhen you bring home a Manchester Terrier puppy. Von Willebrand disease (vWD)is a genetic blood disease that can lead to excessive bleeding after normal procedures or injuries. In severe cases, affected dogs canbleed spontaneously from their noseor mouth and may have uncontrollable bleeding after surgery. Spontaneous or unusual bleeding can also be noticed as bruising on the skin or gums. Pet parents should be prepared to take precautions to avoid blood loss even after minor injuries, and affected dogs shouldn’t be given blood thinning medication, such asaspirin. A veterinarian can detect vWD with a blood test. Hypothyroidismhappens when a dog’s body doesn’t produce enough thyroid hormone. The ailment can make it hard for a dog to maintain their metabolism and lead to other health problems. Signs of hypothyroidism include: Weight gain, despite no changes in diet or exercise Lethargy Heat-seeking behavior Dry and brittle hair Recurring skin infections Recurring ear infections Talk to your veterinarian if you notice any of these symptoms in your Manchester Terrier. Primary lens luxationoccurs when the eye’s lens slips out of place. It can lead to cloudy,red,painful, and teary eyes, and can cause blindness if not treated early. Treatment includes surgically removing the lens or medication to reduce discomfort. According to the CMTC, Manchester Terriers can developalopeciaandseasonal alopecia. Alopecia is characterized by hair loss around the temples, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs. Seasonal alopecia typically develops on the flanks (the area reaching from the sides of the chest to the front of the legs). Talk to your veterinarian if you have concerns about your dog’s coat or notice hair loss. Manchester Terrier dogs need a high-quality and age-appropriate diet. Puppies should eatpuppy food, adults need adult food, and seniors can eat adiet specially formulated for older dogs. All food should meet the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Your veterinarian can help youchoose the best food for your dogto ensure they get allnecessary nutrients. Feed your Manchester Terrier twice a day: once in the morning and once in the evening. Manchester Terrierpuppies can benefit from eating three smaller mealsper day to preventhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Avoid free-feeding because this can lead toobesity, and always measure your dog’s food to the correct portions. Talk to your veterinarian about how much to feed your dog. Your dog food packaging will provide guidelines based on your dog’s weight, but your vet can refine that to match your dog’s lifestyle and health. Manchester Terriers eating an AAFCO-approved diet will receive all the necessary nutrients. However, your veterinarian may recommend specificsupplements for your dog, such asfish oilorjoint supplements, depending on their health. Never give your dog a supplement without your veterinarian’s guidance. Manchester Terriers are deeply devoted to their family, according to theBritish Manchester Terrier Club (BMTC), but are morereserved around strangers. With early and consistent socialization, they can warm up around new people. Manchesters also do well with children, especially when exposed to kids during puppyhood, and can get along with other dogs with theproper introductions. As an active breed, Manchester Terriers may have more energy than othercalmer dog breeds. You might need to take your Manchesteron a daily runto tire them out; the BMTC recommends 30–60 minutes of daily exercise for this breed. A true terrier, the Manchester is known for barking and digging. They might not bark excessively,according to the CMTC, but they maybark for your attention or to alert youto something. Consistent training can help reduce barkingand other undesirable behaviors. A Manchester Terrier’s digging behavior comes from their ancestral prey drive. Pet parents can minimize damage from digging by exercising and mentally stimulating their dog so they won’t be tempted to dig for entertainment. Always keep your Manchester on a leash or inside a fenced space to help curb their prey drive. And because they may see smaller animals as something to chase, they might not be the best dog for homes with pocket pets, such as hamsters or gerbils. As smart dogs, Manchester Terriers are quick and eager learners. They thrive withpositive reinforcement trainingand, once they masterbasic cues like “sit"and “stay,” can go on to learn more advanced tricks and skills, including agility. Because they can be more reserved around new people, it’s important tosocialize your Manchester Terrier puppyfrom the moment you bring them home. This helps them grow to be more comfortable and confident in new situations. Hunting Running Scent walks Digging Hiking Agility Obedience Tracking Flyball Swimming Because of their smooth and short coat, Manchester Terriers are relatively easy to groom and don’t require much upkeep. Manchester Terriers can developallergies, alopecia, and hypothyroidism (which can cause skin infections), so pay special attention to changes in their skin. Contact your vet if you notice redness, hair loss,increased itching, a thickening of the skin, or other skin-related symptoms. The black and tan coat not only looks dapper, but it’s also easy to care for. According to the CMTC, Manchesters don’t often develop a doggie smell, and their thin coat means matting isn’t an issue. Manchester Terriers shed regularly but not excessively. Brushing them once a week with arubber curry brushorbristle brushwill help keep shedding to a minimum. Manchester Terriers need regular eye exams to screen for conditions, including primary lens luxation. Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision. It’s common to see Manchester Terriers withcropped ears, although theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association advises against this cosmetic procedure. Uncropped Manchesters will have ears that fold over and flop. Talk to your veterinarian about how and how often you shouldclean your dog’s ears. Always use aveterinarian-recommended ear cleanerand be alert for signs of an infection. Pet parents can create the perfect home for a Manchester Terrier by being patient, present, and active. Prepare to dedicate your time to training your dog not to bark or dig inappropriately, but you’ll likely have to accept these behaviors as they arise. Prioritize exercise (at least 30 minutes a day) and mental stimulation to keep your Manchester Terrier happy and healthy. But while Manchesters need ample training, exercise, and socialization, their grooming needs are typically minimal. Manchester Terriers are affectionate and active dogs that can makegood family dogswhen well socialized and consistently trained. Yes, Manchester Terriers are known to bark a lot to alert their humans or to get their attention. Consistent, patient, and positive training can help reduce this behavior. A Manchester Terrier’s ears don’t naturally stand up on their own—to do so, they would need to be cropped. However, ear cropping is a cosmetic procedure that many veterinary organizations, including the AVMA, oppose because it has no proven benefits for the dog. WRITTEN BY Zack Newman Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians