SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-pork

Lindsay Boyers kramar89/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images NOTE: Always check with your veterinarian before giving your dog any new foods, especially “people foods. ” What might be OK for one dog might not be good for your dog, depending on multiple factors such as their age, health history, health conditions, and diet. Dogs on prescription diets should not be fed any food or treats outside the diet unless your veterinarian tells you it’s fine to do so. You’re whipping up pork chops for dinner, and your pup stares at you with a sparkle of hope in their eyes—but can dogs eat pork, too? The answer depends on how it’s prepared. Cooked, plain pork can be safe for dogs in moderation, but processed or seasoned pork products may pose health risks. From potential digestive issues to concerns about fat content, seasoning, and parasites if pork is undercooked, understanding the dos and don’ts of feeding pork to your pup is essential. Yes, dogs can have pork in moderation. There are some things you’ll want to consider before feeding it to your pup, though: The pork must be fully cooked and unseasoned. Only serve leaner cuts of pork, like tenderloin or pork loin chops—and cut off any excess fat. Give them an appropriate serving for their size (guidelines below). While dogs can eat pork meat, theyshould not have pork bones. Pork bones are brittle (especially if cooked) and can splinter in your dog’s mouth or digestive tract, causing punctures, damage to the cheeks or gums, or other serious health concerns. Raw pork bones are more durable than cooked bones, but they can be too hard for your dog’s teeth and contribute to dental problems, likecracked teeth. Pork bones may also be too small for your dog, cause damage to the delicate tissues of your dog’s mouth and gums, and pose a choking hazard. Pork does have some nutritional benefits for dogs, including: It provides essential vitamins and minerals. In addition to protein, pork provides essential nutrients, like vitamins B6 and B12, potassium, and zinc. These nutrients work together to help your dog produce energy and keep their blood and brain healthy. Dogs tend to find pork very tasty, so it can be a good tool for training sessions. Dogs’ digestive systems are great at digesting meat, and pork is no different. Compared to other types of food, pork is easy to digest and less likely to cause stomach upset, assuming you’re giving your dog a lean variety with the fat removed. Pork does come with some concerns. Most of these are related to how the pork is prepared, so it’s worth reiterating that you should only give your dog plain, unseasoned pork. Here are some potential risks of giving your dog pork: It carries parasites. Pork is known for carrying a parasite, Trichinella spiralis, a roundworm that can causevomiting,diarrhea,abdominal pain,appetite loss, andweight loss. This is more of a concern with raw or undercooked pork, so make sure you’re cooking pork thoroughly before giving it to your dog. TheUSDA recommendscooking ground pork patties and mixtures to 160 F (71. 1 C) and pork steaks, chops, and roasts to 145 F (62. Raw pork can cause other foodborne illness. Raw pork is also apotential source of Salmonella and Yersinia bacterial infections in dogs. Foodborne illnesses can cause diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal pain and can pose a health risk to people. Some cuts of pork, like pork shoulder and rib chops, are high in fat. Too much fat can contribute topancreatitis in dogs. It can contribute to weight gain and obesity. Overfeeding your dog pork, especially fatty or processed cuts, can contribute to weight gain. Because of this, you want to make sure all treats, including pork, account for no more than 10% of your dog’s daily calories. It may be prepared with toxic ingredients. Table scraps likely containseasoningslikegarlicandsaltthat can be toxic to your dog. Feed your dog only plain, unseasoned pork. Processed pork products like bacon and sausage typically contain lots of salt, in addition to other seasonings and flavorings. Too much salt can lead todehydrationandsalt poisoning, which causes diarrhea, vomiting, and even death in severe cases. Only give your dog unprocessed pork to be safe. Treatsshould be fed in moderation, making up no more than 10% of the total calories of your dog’s daily diet. The rest should come from acomplete and well-balanced dog food. If you’re feeding your dog pork for the first time, introduce it slowly to see how they react. If you notice symptoms like diarrhea or upset stomach, or any other changes in your dog, stop feeding them pork. Stick to the recommended serving sizes listed below. For reference, a piece should measure about 1/2-inch long by 1/2-inch thick. When feeding your dog pork, you want to make sure it’s plain, unseasoned, and cut into bite-sized pieces that are appropriate for the size of your dog. Here are some ideas: Chop plain cooked pork into small pieces, and give it to your dog as a treat. Stuff aKONG Classic Dog Toywith kibble pieces and a couple of small pieces of pork (depending on your dog’s size) and let your dog enjoy. Mix a couple pieces of pork into their regular meal or sprinkle some pork on top. You can also opt for pork-flavored dog treats, likeTylee’s Pork Jerky Dog Treats, if you don’t want to prepare the pork yourself. Dogs can eat a small amount of pork chops, as long as they’re thoroughly cooked and unseasoned. Remove the meat from the bone and cut into 1/2-inch-thick by 1/2-inch-long pieces before feeding it to your dog. No, dogs should not have pork chop bones, especially if they’re cooked. Pork chop bones can break and splinter, which can lead to punctures in the mouth, gums, and gastrointestinal tract and intestinal obstruction. No, dogs should not eat raw pork. Always cook pork thoroughly before giving it to your dog. Pork rinds are fried and tossed in salt, making them higher in fat and sodium than plain pork. High-fat, high-salt treats can cause stomach upset and may even lead to pancreatitis. WRITTEN BY Lindsay Boyers Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians