SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-sweet-potatoes

April Saylor NOTE: Always check with your veterinarian before giving your dog any new foods, especially “people foods. ” What might be OK for one dog might not be good for your dog, depending on multiple factors such as their age, health history, health conditions, and diet. Dogs on prescription diets should not be fed any food or treats outside the diet unless your veterinarian tells you it’s fine to do so. Sweet potatoes are loaded with fiber, antioxidants, and important vitamins and minerals, which makes them a go-to carb for health-conscious humans. But can dogs eat sweet potatoes safely too? According to veterinarians, yes—when prepared the right way, sweet potatoes can be a nutritious, low-fat treat for dogs. That said, some forms of sweet potato are better than others and a few prep steps are non-negotiable if you want to avoid tummy trouble. Here’s everything you need to know before sharing this starchy side with your dog. Yes, dogs can have sweet potatoes as long as they’re fully cooked and unseasoned. This vitamin-rich carbohydrate is even becoming a common ingredient incommercial dog foodanddog treats. As long as you watch out for extra ingredients that can sneak into human recipes (likebutter,sugar, and molasses) and don’t offer too much, these starchy root veggies are considered a safe dog treat. You can also give your dog sweet potato treats. Here are a few of our favorites:  When fed in moderation, sweet potatoes can be a nutritional treat for your pup. Here are a few reasons sweet potatoes are considered a healthy snack for dogs: High in fiber:Sweet potatoes are a good source of dietary fiber, which helps dogs with digestion. These special spuds are also considered acomplex carbohydrate, meaning they provide a steady source of energy. Good source of beta-carotene:Like other orange veggies such ascarrots, sweet potatoes contain high amounts of beta-carotene, which a dog’s body turns into vitamin A. Vitamin A helps dogs’ eye health, immune function, and cell growth. Vitamins and minerals:Sweet potatoes are also a good source of other vitamins and minerals, including vitamin C, manganese, potassium, and iron. Low glycemic index:As asource of carbohydrates, sweet potatoes have a relatively low glycemic index, which means they’re less likely to cause a spike in your dog’s blood sugar. This can be beneficial fordogs with diabetes. Antioxidants:Sweet potatoes contain antioxidants that may help protect cells fromdamage caused by free radicals. Sweet potatoes are generally safe for dogs, but feeding too much—or serving them the wrong way—can come with some potential risks: Digestive issues:Eating large amounts of sweet potato, especially raw, can lead to gastrointestinal upset likegas,bloating, vomiting, ordiarrhea. Allergic reactions:Some dogs may have an allergy to sweet potatoes, though this is rare. It can show up asitching,ear infections, or digestive upset. Choking hazard:Large chunks of sweet potato, particularly if raw or undercooked, can be achoking hazardor lead to anintestinal blockage. All treats combined (including veggies like sweet potatoes) should only make up 10% of your dog’s overall calories. The other 90% should be from adiet of well-balanced dog food. When feeding your dog cooked, plain sweet potato, start slow—any new food may cause gastrointestinal upset. See how your pup reacts to a small amount before giving them a full serving size. Here are some general guidelines for how much sweet potato is safe for dogs to eat, based on their weight: Note that these are just general guidelines. It’s always best to check with your veterinarian before making major changes to your dog’s diet. If you’re planning to share sweet potatoes with your pup, proper prep is key. Here’s how to make sure they’re safe and easy to digest: Wash and peel. Wash the sweet potatoes thoroughly and then peel them. While not toxic, sweet potato skin can be tough to digest and may increase the risk of choking, especially for smaller dogs. Always cook sweet potato for dogs before serving. Steaming, boiling, microwaving, or baking are all great options. Cooking helps break down tough fibers that can be hard on your dog’s stomach. Cut sweet potatoes into bite-sized pieces or mash them to make it easier for your dog to eat and reduce the risk of choking. Don’t add butter, oil, salt, sugar or other seasonings. Spices likenutmegcan also be toxic to dogs in large amounts. Once prepped, you can serve sweet potatoes a few different ways: On their own as a soft snack Mixed into your dog’s food Stuffed inside enrichment toys, like aKONG Classic Spread onto a lick mat, like theFrisco Silicone Treat Lick Mat Yes, puppies can eat sweet potatoes, but only in small amounts and always cooked and plain. Since their digestive systems are still developing, it’s especially important to introduce new foods slowly and monitor for any signs of stomach upset. While cooked, unseasoned sweet potatoes are fine in moderation, don’t feed your dog raw sweet potatoes. Uncooked sweet potatoes are difficult for them to chew and can be achoking hazard. They can also cause an upset stomach. Potato skins are not always safe for dogs to eat because their chewy exterior can cause dogs to choke, and even lead to intestinal blockages. Be sure that any sweet potato you give to your dog is cooked and that the skins are removed. Dogscaneat sweet potato fries, but they’re not the best choice. Most fries—whether homemade or store-bought—are cooked in oil and may be seasoned with salt,garlic, oronionpowder, all of which can be harmful to dogs. If you want to give your dog sweet potato fries, bake them and serve them plain. WRITTEN BY April Saylor Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians