SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-cat-food

chendongshan/ via Getty Images If you have both dogs and cats in your household, you’ve probably had to deal with a dog trying to steal some cat food. Many dogs seem to find it irresistible. But can dogs eat cat food or is it dangerous? It depends. While a small amount of cat food will not cause health problems for most dogs, it’s not recommended to feed dogs cat food. Ahead, we discuss what happens if a dog eats too much cat food; the difference between dog food and cat food; and more. While dog food and cat food may look similar, they’re actually quite different. Most cat foods containsignificantly more proteinand fat than comparable dog foods. Requirements for certain amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals also vary. Here are a few of the more important differences between dog food and cat food, according to the Association of American Feed Control Officials’ (AAFCO)nutrient profiles for adult dogs and cats:   AAFCO Minimum for Adult Dogs AAFCO Minimum for Adult Cats Protein 18% 26% Fat 5. 2% (canned food) Arachidonic Acid 0 0. 02% Vitamin A 5,000 IU/kg 3332 IU Calcium 0. 6%  Dogs and cats have distinct nutritional requirements. They can get all the nutrients they need by eating ingredients derived from other animals or certain plants. Cats, on the other hand, are obligate carnivores. Their nutritional needs can only be met when they eat ingredients derived from other animals. It's important that your dog eats a nutritionally-balanced food that's appropriate for their life stage and size, from avet-recommended dog food brandlikeRoyal Canin,Hill's, orPurina Pro Plan. Cat food is not an ideal food for dogs. If you are concerned your dog is not eating, have your veterinarian examine them to rule out underlying medical conditions, and ask your vet for dietary recommendations. Your vet might prescribe medications to help stimulate your dog’s appetite or to help with nausea. Or they may recommend a therapeutic diet for dogs recovering from an illness, injury, or surgery who need extra calories and protein. Cat food can be especially bad for some dogs, including those who: Need to be on a low-fat or moderate-protein diet Have a history ofpancreatitis,hyperlipidemia,chronic kidney disease,liver disease, or asensitive stomach Unhealthy weight gain can also become a problem if dogs eat cat food for a long time. But any dog could become sick after eating a lot of cat food. The exact amount that could cause problems depends on factors like the type of cat food, the size of the dog, and their current diet and health status. Symptoms to look out for include: Abdominal discomfort Vomiting Diarrhea Poor appetite  Call your veterinarian for advice if your dog is acting sick after eating cat food. If, however, your dog seems to feel fine, simply monitor them for vomiting, diarrhea, or other signs that a problem might be developing. Dogs who have eaten a lot of cat food (more than what a typical serving of food would be for your dog) should skip their next meal before resuming their normal feeding schedule. Here are some tips for keeping your dog away from cat food: Adoor propis a simple and inexpensive way to keep a door open just wide enough to let cats through while keeping all but the smallest dogs out. If your cat eats at specific times (rather than having food left out), you can use acrateorplaypento keep your pets separated during meals. While it is possible for a dog to die from eating cat food (they could develop a severe case of pancreatitis, for example), it is very unlikely. Most dogs will be fine if they only eat a small amount of cat food. Talk to a veterinarian if your dog appears unwell after eating cat food. If your dog wants to eat only cat food, try tofind a dog foodthat is like the cat food they like—acanned dog food with chickenas its first ingredient, for example. Only feed cat food to your dog if your veterinarian has advised that you do so. Cat food contains too much protein and fat for most dogs and doesn’t provide them with balanced nutrition. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians