SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/miniature-pinscher

Elise Schmelzer Known as the “king of toy breeds,” the Miniature Pinscher is a regal and commanding dog that doesn’t seem to realize he is so tiny. Min Pins, as they’re often called, are only about 1 foot tall at the shoulder and weigh no more than 11 pounds. But they are energetic, confident dogs with boundless curiosity and a big personality. Miniature Pinschers trace their lineage back hundreds of years to Germany, where they worked to keep rats out of barnyards. Contrary to a common misperception, Miniature Pinschers are not miniDoberman Pinschers. Instead, breed historians believe the Miniature Pinscher to be a cross of theDachshundand theItalian Greyhound, according to theMiniature Pinscher Club of America (MPCA). While Min Pins require minimal grooming, they are intelligent, high-energy dogs that need ample exercise, consistent training, and attentive supervision. These little pups tend to think they’re much larger than they actually are, and their fearless nature can easily get them into trouble. Miniature Pinschers are one of thelongest-living dog breedswith a lifespan of 12–16 years. They are typically robust and healthy dogs, though they can suffer from some conditions that are common amongsmall dog breeds. According tothe breed club, one of the most common health problems in Miniature Pinschers ispatellar luxation, or a dislocated kneecap. A dog with a dislocated kneecap may lift his hind leg suddenly or walk with a periodic limp or “bunny hop. ” The condition is hereditary and more common in small dogs like the Min Pin. Veterinarians may prescribe anti-inflammatory medications for your limping pup or simply restrict exercise for a period of time. Surgery may be recommended in the most serious cases. Legg-Calvé-Perthes diseasecauses blood to stop flowing to the ball at the top of the femur, which then breaks down inside the hip joint. Researchers aren’t sure what causes the disease, which is more common in small dogs than in larger breeds. Symptoms generally include lameness, hip pain, and lifting the affected leg. The only treatment is surgery to remove the ball of the femur or to replace the entire hip. Small dogs, including Min Pins, typically recover easily from this surgery and go on to live long, pain-free lives. Miniature Pinscher dogs are also more susceptible to epilepsy, according to the breed club. The primary symptom of epilepsy in dogs is repeated seizures, which can cause your Min Pin to collapse, jerk or convulse, stiffen, pass out, and/or drool. Seizures in dogscan last a few seconds to several minutes. Consult a veterinarian if your dog’s seizure lasts more than five minutes or if multiple occur in succession. Your dog should also have a checkup at the vet if it’s their first time having a seizure, even if the episode is short. Treatment for epilepsy generally involves a lifelong medication routine. Miniature Pinschers don’t eat very much, so it’s important that their food is of the highest quality, says Chris Smith, secretary of the MPCA. Smith recommends a food with grains, such as brown rice and barley, to make sure your canine companion stays at a healthy weight. Any food you feed your Min Pin should beapproved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Min Pin puppies need to eat multiple times a day on aconsistent feeding schedule. The breed club recommends dividing their food into three or four meals. Adult Min Pins, however, can snarf all their daily nutrition needs down in a single daily meal. These dogs can benefit from aslow-feeder bowlto slow their eating. How much you feed your Min Pin depends on your specific dog’s weight, health, lifestyle, and other factors. Your veterinarian can help you determine portion sizes, and you can also follow the guidance on your pup’s dog food packaging. Generally, a high-quality dog food will meet a Min Pin’s nutritional needs, Smith says. Your dog shouldn’t need nutritional supplements unless your vet recommends them. Miniature Pinschers are fearless, spirited dogs that radiate confidence. As outgoing, active, and intelligent animals, they can make excellent family pets with the right socialization and training. But this confidence and intelligence can get them into trouble. According to the MPCA, Miniature Pinschers can be little escape artists, wiggling through fence posts and darting out the door. Keep an eye on your Min Pin whenever he’s outside to make sure he’s safe. Because of their nonstop energy, Min Pins need activities that will keep their bodyandmind engaged. But their small size means you don’t have to run a mile with them every day: These pint-size pups are happy with playtime in the backyard or living room withtheir favorite toyand human. They can quickly pick up training cues, but they can also be independent-minded and choose to not follow your signals. Smith recommends pairing training with feeding times so learning becomes a fun activity with a reward. Obedience training Fetch Agility courses Chew toys Field trials Dock jumping The Min Pin’s smooth, short coat is generally easy to care for, and grooming for this low-maintenance breed is typically simple. Healthy Miniature Pinschers typically don’t require any special skin care. Don’tgive your dog too many baths—that’ll dry out his skin and coat. It’s better to take a damp washcloth and wipe him down with warm water about once a week. The Miniature Pinscher’s coat is short, so it’s pretty low maintenance. But the MPCA does recommend brushing them about once a week to keep their fur shiny and clean. A Min Pin’s big eyes can develop some problems. Contact your veterinarian if you notice any changes, such aseye discharge. Miniature Pinschers may need to have theirears cleaned regularlywith adog-specific ear cleanser. Contact your veterinarian if you noticesigns of an ear infection, such as redness, odor, or if your Min Pin is scratching at his ears. Families who bring home a Miniature Pinscher dog need to take serious care toPinscher-proof their home. The highly curious breed is known to investigate any object in their reach and any space they can fit their body into,the breed club warns. Whenpuppy-proofing your home, put any objects you don’t want your dog investigating (or chewing) away—this includes objects on tables, chairs, and countertops, which a crafty Min Pin can still get to. The breed club also recommends putting screens on your doors to help stop your pup from escaping the house. Min Pin puppies from reputable breeders can cost $1,000–$3,000, Smith says. Miniature Pinschers are great family dogs and can adapt to many housing situations—as long as their quick minds are kept engaged through exercise and training. Min Pins—and especially Min Pin puppies—can be vocal and learn to communicate early, Smith says. Early and consistent training can help your new family memberlearn when it isn’t appropriate to bark. Miniature Pinschers are affectionate dogs that love their families. They like to be held, to be wrapped in blankets, and to sleep with their humans at night. The lifespan of a Min Pin is 12–16 years. Featured Image: iStock/andrea-goitia WRITTEN BY Elise Schmelzer Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians