SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/staffordshire-bull-terrier

Sarah Kloepple The Staffordshire Bull Terrier’s affinity for their human companions is legendary—even the small ones, hence the breed’s nickname, “the nanny dog. ” The breed, known for its loyalty, is named after its U. origins and is often considered a descendant of 19th-century Bull Terriers (a cross between Old Bulldogs and British Terriers), according to theStaffordshire Bull Terrier Club of America(SBTCA). This medium-size breed—called Staffies for short—can reach up to 16 inches tall and weigh 24–38 pounds. They’re often stocky and muscular (some might say buff!) and are described as playful and protective. Staffordshire Bull Terriers love their people and their comforts at home, but they’re also active, agile, and curious. Tug-of-war is a go-to game, and you can’t go wrong with along, leash-led walk. Staffies have a short, glossy coat that loses dirt easily and dries quickly, so minimal grooming is required. Like any breed, each Staffy dog has their own personality. The SBTCA describes themas a physically and mentally tenacious breed, but adds that many Staffies live peacefully with other animals. It comes down to proper socialization, training, and supervision. Overall, they are an intelligent and loving breed—some are even lap dogs—and will dedicate themselves to you and your home. The average Staffordshire Bull Terrier lifespan is 12–14 years, and the breed is statistically a healthy dog. But it’s important for pet parents to know that Staffies are very averse to heat. Limit outdoor exercise in warm weather, and make sure they have plenty of shade and water. And, like any breed, Staffordshire Bull Terriers can be susceptible to health conditions, including: Elbow dysplasiarefers to abnormalities in a dog’s elbow where the joint doesn’t develop properly. Hip dysplasiais a similar condition, where the hip joint doesn’t fit together properly and becomes loose. If left untreated, both can lead toarthritis. Ask your vet for a screening if you notice symptoms like lameness or limping, an abnormal gait, or a swollen joint. Treatment can includejoint supplements,weight management, and surgery in severe cases. Patellar luxationrefers to the knee joint moving out of its proper position. This often manifests as a limp and bunny-hopping gait. Like with hip and elbow dysplasia, treatment usually involves supplements and weight management, but surgery can be required in severe cases. JHC causes clouding in a Staffy’s eye lens. And while manydogs develop cataractsas they age, JHC causes cataracts in young dogs. Dogs with JHC candevelop cataracts during their first year of lifeand become blind by the time they’re 2–3 years old. Corrective surgery is a treatment option, and the SBTCA recommends breeders genetically test for this ailment. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (or L-2-HGA) is a genetic condition that affects a dog’s metabolism. It can lead to neurologic issues such as brain damage. Symptoms,according to the SBTCA, include: Epileptic seizures Wobbly gait Behavioral changes Tremors Muscle stiffness as a result of exercise or excitement There is currently no cure, but responsible Staffy breeders will screen their dogs for this condition. DM is the slow-onset destruction of the spinal cord. According toCornell University, DM in dogs acts similarly toLou Gehrig’s disease, or ALS, in humans. A dog withdegenerative myelopathywill start showing signs when they’re middle-aged and become weaker over time. Eventually, DM causes paralysis. Currently, there are no effective treatments for DM aside from palliative care, and diet and exercise. One of the best ways to keep dogs healthy is to feed them the right amount ofhigh-quality dog food. Pet parents should choose a food that’sapproved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)for your dog’s current life stage. Consult your vet on the best feeding schedule, especially for a Staffy puppy, and the best ways to balance meeting nutritional needs while avoiding overfeeding. Staffy puppies should be fed three or four times a dayon a consistent schedule. Adult Staffies can be fed twice a day. If you have concerns about feeding your Staffordshire Bull Terrier, contact your vet. The amount of food your Staffy needs varies by dog. Factors influencing their portions include your dog’s lifestyle, age, weight, and activity level. Dog food bags will often have a feeding guide that typically recommends a total amount of food that should be given to your dog over a 24-hour period, but always talk to your veterinarian for the best guidance. When it comes to training, Staffies respond well to positive reinforcement (which often means treats!). That said, some dogs can beprone to gaining weight, so avoid giving your Staffy too many goodies. Consider using healthy treats, such ascarrots,apples, orblueberriesto keep your pup fit and healthy. You should be able to feel (but not see) your Staffy’s ribs without having to press too hard. Staffies are playful and affectionate, so pet parents can expect a breed that craves their love and attention. They are known for their gentle nature toward children—so much, in fact, that they’ve earned the nickname “the nanny dog. ” Puppy Staffies brought up with cats and other dogs generally do well with them, according to the SBTCA. If you already have a dog and are bringing an older Staffy into your home, introduce the dogs away from the house in a neutral area. In general, Staffies are not persistent barkers, though the SBTCA notes they might bark or “talk” while playing or to alert you of a visitor. Bouts of exercise and long walks are important to meet their high energy levels, but they’re also very content napping on your couch. Staffies are also known for their smarts, and they respond best to a positive, creative training approach. The SBTCA warns that the breed can be stubborn and exuberant, so persistence and patience when training is also important. Agility Hiking/long walks Tug-of-war Scent work Lure coursing Staffordshire Bull Terriers don’t need a ton of grooming. Their coats are smooth, short, and easy to clean if needed. While no special skin care is required for Staffies, it doesn’t hurt to bathe them after a particularly messy playdate outside. But if your Staffy rolls around in the grass, a thorough brushing might be all that’s needed. Though Staffies have a low-maintenance coat, they benefit from an occasional brushing and bath. But their coatdoesmake Staffies susceptible to fleas and ticks, so ask your vet aboutflea and tick prevention, and give them a good brushing with a flea comb in the summer months. Staffordshire Bull Terriers typically don’t require special eye care, but pet parents should watch for signs of cataracts, especially if their dog hasn’t been tested for JHC. Staffordshire Bull Terriers don’t require special ear care. Your vet can help determine if—and how often—you shouldclean your dog’s ears. If you plan to bring home a Staffy puppy, know that you’re getting a breed that looks tough on the outside but is an affectionate, loving cuddler on the inside. Their low-maintenance grooming and nutritional needs make them ideal for most pet owners, but they’ll do best in a home with pet parents who are active, attentive, and patient. The average Staffordshire Bull Terrier lifespan is 12-14 years. According to the SBTCA, there are a handful of dogs that come from the general classification of “bull breeds. ” This includes the Staffordshire Bull Terrier, theAmerican Staffordshire Terrier, and theAmerican Bulldog. The Pit Bull isn’t actually a breed on its own; many “bull breeds” are lumped together and called Pit Bulls. Yes, Staffies can make wonderful additions to your home. They are eager to please and are most happy spending time with their pet parents, whether it’s a rainy day inside on the couch or a sunny day walking through the park. But they do take lots of patience and early socialization! Featured Image: iStock/CBCK-Christine WRITTEN BY Sarah Kloepple Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians