SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/morkie

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA A “Morkie” is a cross between aMalteseand aYorkshire Terrier (Yorkie). Sometimes called the Morkshire Terrier, the Morkie is a relatively new mix and is not yet recognized as an official breed by the American Kennel Club (AKC). Without a breed standard, it can be difficult to make absolute statements regarding the Morkie’s temperament and appearance. However, the two parent breeds have been established with the AKC since the 1800s and serve as helpful templates for making predictions. The Maltese is an ancient breed thought to have been brought to the island of Malta by Phoenician conquerors. With their striking coat of silky, long, white hair; compact size; and winsome demeanor, the breed became a favorite of early Greeks and Romans. Even famed philosopher Aristotle praised the dog’s “perfect” proportions. Thebreed standarddescribes Maltese as being “among the gentlest mannered of all little dogs,” but also “lively and playful as well as vigorous. ” The Yorkie’s history is far less expansive, but no less interesting. The breed was developed in the mid-19th century by Scottish immigrant weavers living in Yorkshire, England. Feisty, courageous, and tiny enough to navigate the smallest spaces, Yorkies were tasked with rodent hunting in the region’s textile mills and mines. But after becoming recognized by the AKC in 1885, the breed largely shed its working-dog reputation in favor of becoming the lap dog of fashionable Victorians. When these two popular toy breeds combine, you can typically expect an affectionate, playful, and confident Morkie. These pups can thrive in a variety of environments, thanks to their adaptability and petite size. A Morkie, full-grown, is typically 7 pounds or less. The Morkie is a crossbreed that carries some contradictions. For example, like mostsmall dogs, Morkies are short in stature but not in personality. The descendants of status symbols and rat hunters, Morkie dogs are spirited and fearless, but also affectionate and gentle. Furthermore, while they are far from sluggish, Morkies need moderate amounts of exercise, such as ashort walk every day. These dogs have a reputation for being a low-shedding breed, but don’t let that fool you into thinking grooming will be a breeze: Those long, silky locks are prone to matting and need to be brushed daily. With their tiny size, medium exercise needs, friendliness, and trainability, Morkies can be a great choice for apartment dwellers and first-time pet parents who can provide them with close companionship. But because they’re rarely more than 7 pounds, Morkies may not be the best companions for young children or larger pets that can cause them accidental harm. Both Maltese and Yorkshire Terriers arehealthy breedswithlife expectancies of 11–15 years, and the Morkie’s lifespan is similar. Still, like all dogs, the two breeds are prone to various health conditions that can be passed to their offspring. This highlights the importance of working with a Morkie breeder who’s committed to health over profit and performs genetic testing before breeding. The following conditions are common in Maltese, Yorkies, or both: When the patella (kneecap) moves outside its normal groove within the femur (thigh bone), this is calledpatellar luxation(dislocation). The condition is more common in smaller breeds like Maltese and Yorkies. In some dogs it doesn’t cause a problem, but severe cases may require surgery. Signs of patellar luxation include: Limping Bunny-hopping Popping, cracking knee joint Periodontal disease, or gum disease, is a progressive condition in which bacteria accumulate in the mouth, causing damage to the dog’s gums, bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs, small and toy breeds (including the Maltese and the Yorkie) are especially prone to the problem. Signs of periodontal disease range from irritated gums andbad breathto missing teeth and root exposure. Mild cases may only needa professional dental cleaning, while severely affected teeth must be extracted. Frequenttooth brushing at home(at least three times a week) and regular professional cleanings are the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Whileportosystemic shunts(also called liver shunts) are relatively uncommon, Maltese and Yorkies are among those predisposed to the condition. A liver shunt is an abnormal blood vessel that connects blood from the digestive tract directly to the circulatory system, without properly going through the liver first. This blood—which contains nutrients, hormones, and waste material—therefore skips the vital detoxification process that happens in the liver. Treatment depends on the severity of the condition. Some dogs are good candidates for surgery, and others require medical management (such as medication and diet change). Signs of portosystemic shunts include: Poor growth Poor appetiteor an appetite for unusual items Weight loss Increased thirst and urination Difficulty urinating orblood in the urine Vomiting(may contain blood) Diarrhea(may contain blood) Behavioral changes such as dullness, vacant staring, vision loss, clumsiness, and circling Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)is a common congenital heart defect in dogs, and the Maltese is at an increased risk. The ductus arteriosus is a blood vessel that is necessary during fetal development to divert blood away from the fetus’ lungs. Shortly after birth, this vessel naturally closes to allow blood to flow through the lungs for oxygenation. But in puppies with PDA, the ductus arteriosus stays open, resulting in a dangerous disruption of normal circulation. This can lead toheart failure, the signs of which include difficulty breathing, coughing, weakness, and exercise intolerance. Corrective surgery to close the vessel is the treatment of choice, and outcomes are best if it’s done before the dog develops heart failure. The trachea, often called the windpipe, is a tube consisting of C-shaped rings of cartilage covered with a thin membrane that carries air from the mouth and nose to the lungs. If the cartilage weakens or the membrane stretches out, the trachea’s shape flattens. This is calledtracheal collapse, and Yorkshire Terriers carry an increased risk of developing this condition. Medication is typically enough to help most dogs with tracheal collapse if they have clinical signs, but some may require surgery. If the symptoms are not persistent or severe, treatment might not be necessary. Dogs with tracheal collapse tend to have a recurring cough that sounds like a goose honk that tends to worsen with exercise; heat and humidity; excitement; stress; and eating and drinking. Signs can also include: Retching Difficulty breathing Exercise intolerance Blue-tinged gums Fainting There’s no one-size-fits-all recommendation for feeding your Morkie dog. You’ll need to work with your veterinarian to develop a feeding plan that’s nutritionally complete and balanced for your pup’s age, weight, and health. Even the size of the kibble is important, as small teeth need small kibble. Morkiepuppies need frequent meals(three or four a day) to avoidhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Adult Morkies can be fed less frequently, typically two or three times a day. Your vet can help you determine the best schedule for your dog’s age. The nutrition label on your dog’s food bag includes a feeding guide that gives a general idea of how much you should feed your Morkie based on their weight. But for a more precise answer, ask your veterinarian. A vet will tailor their recommendation to your dog’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Remember that treats count—especially in dogs as small as Morkies—so be sure to factor them into your dog’s daily calories. If your Morkie is eating a complete and balanced diet of dog food approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), they shouldn’t need anything extra. However, nutritional supplements and even prescription diets are sometimes used to treat or prevent certain health conditions. Given the Morkie’s parent breeds’ predisposition for developing periodontal disease, your vet may recommenddental chewsas a precaution, though they won’t replace regular tooth brushing! Talk to your veterinary team before adding anything new to your dog’s diet. When socialized early and appropriately trained, these pint-size pups can thrive in a variety of settings, including apartments. Morkies are confident, affectionate dogs who love their families. While their dainty appearance may lead you to believe that Morkies are decorative lap dogs, they love playing and need daily opportunities to move their energetic bodies and challenge their impressive wits—their Yorkie parent was bred to hunt rodents, after all! However, their size does warrant extra caution when it comes to young children and other pets. Morkies may look like mere toys to toddlers—or like a squeaky toy to larger dogs. The Morkie’s confidence, vigilance, and family attachment can sometimeslead to barkingthat outsizes their 7-pound frame, but training can help keep the peace with these comical watch dogs. Addressing this becomes particularly important if you live in an apartment. Morkies are happiest when they’re with their humans. They can get bored, stressed, andanxious when left alone for long periods, resulting in unwanted behaviors, including barking and house-soiling. All dogs go through a critical development period from birth to around 16 weeks old. During this time, they learn how to interact with humans and other animals. Talk to your Morkie breeder about how they approach socialization. If done well, it can pay dividends in adulthood. Morkies areintelligent dogs, but they can be strong-willed when it comes to training. Consistentpositive training that uses rewardsinstead of punishment is the best way to teach your pup while building the human-animal bond. If you’re using treats as a reward, however, remember to factor them into your dog’s daily calorie count. Play, toys, and other things your dog enjoys can also be used as rewards. Short walks Fetch Agility Obedience training Skills training Nose work Both of the Morkie’s parents are known for their eye-catching silky, long hair. The good news: You won’t have to put a lot of effort into cleaning their hair off your clothes and couch because Morkies don’t shed very much. The tradeoff? You may not need a lint roller, but you will need to use a brush or a comb on their luminous locks every day. Good coat care is the foundation of good skin care. Tangles and matting can keep moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your Morkie’s skin, so it’s essential to keep their hair free from problems. A Morkie should be bathed regularly, so ask your veterinarian for help when determining a schedule. Keep in mind thatbathing your pup too oftencan strip their skin of healthy oils, and lead to dryness and itchiness. Long-haired Morkies need to be brushed or combed every day to prevent tangles or mats from forming. But if caring for long locks feels a bit too daunting, you can give your pup a short haircut that’s easier to manage. Regardless of how long you keep your Morkie’s coat, you’ll need to regularly ensure that the hair around their eyes is trimmed so it doesn’t cause irritation. Talk to your veterinarian about how often you shouldclean your Morkie’s ears. If you noticesigns of an ear infection(redness, swelling, pain, or bad odor), it’s time to call your vet. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Morkie puppy to your family: Can I provide a safe environment for a dog who can be easily injured by young children or other pets? Can I brush or comb a dog’s coat at least once a day? Can I provide regular baths? Can I brush a dog’s teeth at least three times a week? Am I home enough to give a dog companionship? Do I have the time to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise every day? Do I have the skills, patience, and dedication to train a dog with a reputation for stubbornness and barking, using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 15 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Morkie. The typical Morkie lifespan, as is the case with most small dogs, is long. You can generally expect a life expectancy of 11–15 years. The cost of adding a Morkie to your family is typically $800–$3,000. However, you may be able to adopt a rescued Morkie for less. Adult, full-grown Morkies are tiny. These compact companions max out at a weight of 7 pounds and a height of 9 inches. Both parent breeds of the Morkie have hair instead of fur. A perk of this is that they are low on the shedding scale. The downside: Their long, silky locks require daily attention to keep tangling under control. Featured Image: Adobe/Anne Richard WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians