SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/shikoku

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA anahtiris/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  The Shikoku (pronounced shee-KOH-coo) is a lively, devoted dog originally bred to hunt boar and deer in the mountainous Kochi Prefecture on Japan’s Shikoku Island. Sometimes referred to as Shikoku Ken and Kochi Ken (“ken” meaning dog), theJapanese dog breed’sancient origins and continued importance in Japan earned it a national monument designation in 1937. Shikoku are hardy, muscular dogs, as required by both their tough job and the rugged terrain where they worked. Even their short, sesame-colored double coat is built to withstand harsh environments, and their medium stature (17–22 inches tall; 35–55 pounds) was (and still is!) an asset to their agility. The Shikoku’s triangular, upright ears and sickle-shaped tail seem to match their alert demeanor. But underneath their tough exterior is a dog built for companionship. As theAmerican Shikoku Ken Club (ASKC)puts it, “They are the most at home when they are treated as part of the family. ”  According to the ASKC, the Shikoku Ken is known to possess three key traits, denoted by the Japanese terms kan’i, ryousei, and soboku. Understanding these traits is foundational to providing a Shikoku with a home in which they can thrive. Kan’i refers to the breed’s “spirit and tenacity,” the ASKC explains. And while their sometimes impulsive, pushy behavior may seem like a character flaw, the breed club describes it as a positive feature, considering Shikoku dogs had to think for themselves and make quick life-and-death decisions as boar hunters. Socializationandtrainingcan help moderate their natural instincts, but pet parents should be prepared to provide patient support. For example, the Shikoku’s kan’i, coupled with theirhigh prey drive, means all outdoor activity should occur eitheron a leashor within a fence. This is the best way to ensure both your dog’s safety and the safety of other animals. Ryousei describes the Shikoku’s obedience and devotion. Shikoku are devoted dogs who are in tune with their people. The ASKC describes them as “highly social animals that crave companionship and enjoy play,” but don’t expect them to take an immediate liking to new people or unfamiliar dogs. This is another reason socialization is so important for Shikoku puppies. Finally, soboku refers to the Shikoku’s rustic appearance and natural dignity. As a working breed, Shikoku need little grooming to look and feel their best. But you should expect their double coat to shed regularly and to need extra care when they lose their undercoat—a process that happens every spring and fall. Shikoku are generallyhealthy dogswith an average lifespan of 10–12 years. However, like all breeds, Shikoku may be genetically predisposed to develop certain conditions, including: Hip dysplasiais a condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly. This causes the joint to be misaligned, eventually leading to pain andarthritis. Mild cases are treated with interventions likephysical therapy,joint supplements, andanti-inflammatory medications, but severe cases may requiresurgery. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to get up from rest or jump up Shifting of weight to front legs Loss of muscle mass in back legs Reluctance to go up or down stairs Epilepsyis a brain condition that causes recurringseizures in dogs. Idiopathic epilepsy (or epilepsy of an unknown cause) has been observed in some Shikoku dogs. Epileptic seizures tend to last a minute or two, and signs can include loss of consciousness, uncontrollable spastic muscle movements, urination, and defecation. Lifelong medication is used to manage the condition. Take your dog to a veterinarian immediately if they have a seizure. Work with your veterinarian to choose thebest dog foodfor your Shikoku. The food you select should: Meet theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards Be nutritionally complete for your dog’s lifestyle, size, and health Be formulated for your dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior) The ASKC notes that Shikoku are notoriously fussy eaters. This may be due to their personality but could also be a sign of digestive issues. Be sure to let your veterinarian know if your dog seems uninterested in their food. Most adult Shikoku should eat two meals a day, once in the morning and again in the evening. Shikoku puppies, however, have a higher metabolism and may need up to three or four meals a day. Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your dog. To determine how much to feed your Shikoku, do two things: Look at the nutrition label on your dog’s food bag. It will use your Shikoku’s weight to provide a general idea of how many calories your dog needs. They can make a highly personalized recommendation based on your individual pup’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Remember thatdog treatsadd up quickly, even in a pup as active as the Shikoku. Be sure treats never make up more than 10% of your dog’s daily diet. Your Shikoku should receive all the nutrients they need from eating a dog food that meets AAFCO standards. However, your veterinarian may recommendnutritional supplementsto treat or manage  various health issues. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. Shikoku have a temperament befitting a boar-hunting dog. Thebreed standarddescribes the Shikoku as “a dog of marked endurance, keen in sense … energetic and highly alert,” aligning with the kan’i trait described by the ASKC. A Shikoku’s energy needs to be channeled into daily exercise—preferably multiple times a day. But once playtime is over, the breed can stay calm and quiet indoors. The traits that are prized in Shikoku during a boar hunt don’t always translate well to family dog life. For example, being impulsive and brave is vital for a dog forced to make swift decisions on the fly, but it’s less desirable in a home setting. And while a tenacious desire to chase is great forhunting dogs, such tendencies can make outdoor play dangerous unless done on a leash or within a fence. Whether living as hunters or family dogs, Shikoku need close human companionship and outlets for their energy. Potential pet parents should be prepared to provide attention and multiple opportunities for exercise each day. Bored, lonely Shikoku with energy to spare are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors likeexcessive barking. Shikoku tend to bereserved around strangers, and the ASKC describes them as “selective” when it comes to other dogs. Socializing Shikoku puppies early and consistently helps them grow into calm, confident, and well-mannered adult dogs. Begin socializing and training your Shikoku puppy as soon as you bring them home. Socialization involves introducing your puppy to new animals, people, environments, activities, and objects with a goal of helping them feel more comfortable in new situations throughout their life. Ask your vet for age-appropriate socialization and training ideas. Shikoku are built to withstand harsh weather, terrain, and work—not harsh training. Like all dogs, Shikoku respond best to aconsistent, positive, rewards-based approach. Training is also a great way to provide your Shikoku withfun mental enrichmentand physical exercise whilebuilding the crucial human-animal bond. Walking Hiking Swimming Fetch Hide and seek Agility Rally Obedience training Skills training  Shikoku have a short, harsh outer coat and a dense undercoat. As expected for a dog built for work, their grooming needs are fairly low. If your Shikoku spends a lot of time outdoors, regularly check them for burrs, sticks, and other debris that can get stuck in their fur and irritate their skin. Checking your dog for ticksis also important, as is keeping them up to date onyear-round flea and tick prevention. The Shikoku’s coat isn’t prone to matting, but it does shed year-round. Regular brushingcan help keep loose hairs in check. You’ll likely need to increase your brushing routine during the spring and fall, when Shikoku dogs shed their undercoat heavily. How often your Shikoku needs a bath depends on their lifestyle. Talk to your veterinarian abouthow often to bathe your dogand whichdog shampoo is best. Shikoku aren’t prone to eye issues, but if you notice squinting,redness,discharge,cloudiness, or apparent vision changes, call your veterinarian. Shikoku aren’t prone to ear problems. However, call your vet if you noticesigns of an ear infection, such as redness, swelling, discharge, and odor. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Shikoku to your family: Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with multiple opportunities for exercise a day? Can I keep a dog on a leash or within a fenced area when outdoors? Am I home enough to provide a dog with close companionship? Do I have the skills and patience to provide early socialization and lifelong training using positive reinforcement? Am I OK with some extra fur on my furniture and clothes? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 12 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Shikoku. Shikoku do best with active families who can provide them with daily outlets for their energy and drive. Built for hunting, Shikoku have traits that don’t always translate well to family life. The ideal living situation for a Shikoku is with experienced pet parents who have the skills, patience, and time to provide early and ongoing socialization and training. Both the Shikoku and theShiba Inuare native Japanese hunting dogs designated as national monuments. While they’re similar in appearance, Shiba Inu are smaller and more foxlike. Yes, Shikoku arerare dogs in the United States. Most are found in Japan, their country of origin. Yes, the double-coated Shikoku sheds regularly. The shedding picks up considerably during the spring and fall, when they lose their undercoats. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians