SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/havapoo

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Adobe_stock/Kevin The Havapoo may have dog-next-door charm, but this pint-size pooch boasts an international pedigree. A mix between the only native Cuban dog breed (theHavanese) and the national dog of France (the Poodle), the Havapoo is not yet recognized by the American Kennel Club. Despite the lack of a breed standard, the Havapoo’s parent breeds are well established with the AKC and can serve as a template for what to expect from this mixed breed. Named after Cuba’s capital city, the Havanese is an endearing mix of brains, beauty, and congeniality. Poodles were originally bred to serve as duck-hunting dogs in Germany, where they would retrieve downed fowl from icy waters. Havapoos typically have either aMiniature Poodle(10–15 pounds) or aToy Poodle(4–6 pounds) parent. And while these smaller Poodles aren’t likely to be quarry-fetching companions, they are no less intelligent or athletic than theirStandard Poodlepredecessors. When these two breeds combine, you can generally expect a Havapoo that’s pleasant both to look at, due to their beautiful coat, and to be around, thanks to their friendly temperament. Havapoos areclever dogsthat thrive with consistent, positive training. Though energetic and active, they need only moderate amounts of exercise every day. Havapoos don’t enjoy being alone for long and can resort tounwanted behaviors like excessive barkingif they don’t get enough attention. Havapoo dogs can get along well with people of all ages and with other pets, but their small size warrants caution. Very small children andvery large dogscan cause unintentional harm, so interactions need to be closely supervised. Full-grown Havapoos will typically weigh less than 15 pounds. While you won’t have to deal with much shedding (which can be a plus for those with allergies), the Havapoo’s luxurious fur will need daily care to keep them free from matting. Both Havanese and Poodles arehealthy breedswith life expectancies of 14–16 years and 10–18 years, respectively. You can expect the Havapoo’s lifespan to fall within these ranges. Still, like all dogs, the two breeds are prone to various health conditions that can be passed to their Havapoo puppies. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is an umbrella term for a family of eye disorders in which the rods and cones of the retina either don’t develop properly in puppies (early-onset PRA) or begin deteriorating in adulthood (late-onset PRA). There is no cure for PRA, and the condition eventually leads to blindness. Signs of PRA include: Reluctance to enter dark spaces Clumsiness (especially in dark spaces) Dilated pupils that constrict slowly in response to light Eyes that are more reflective in the dark Cataracts Periodontal disease(or gum disease) is a progressive condition where bacteria accumulate in the mouth, leading to damage to the dog’s gums, bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs,small and toy breedsare especially prone to the problem. Mild cases may simply require aprofessional dental cleaning, but severely affected teeth must be extracted. Frequenttooth brushing at home(at least three times a week) and regular professional cleanings (usually once a year) are the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Legg-Calve-Perthes diseaseis a condition in which the head of the femur bone deteriorates. This causes the hip joint to disintegrate, leading to bone and joint inflammation (osteoarthritis). While the exact cause is unknown, it most often affects toy, miniature, and small-breed dogs. Many affected dogs require surgery to remove part of the femur, followed by a rigorous exercise and physical therapy regimen. Dogs with this condition tend to recover well and have minimal restrictions or pain after a treatment regime. Signs of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease include: Gradual lameness Lifting affected limbs when walking Pain when moving the hip joint Loss of thigh muscle on affected limbs When the patella (kneecap) shifts outside its normal groove within the femur (thigh bone), it’s termedpatellar luxation(dislocation). This condition is more prevalent in smaller breeds like the Havapoo. While in some dogs a luxating patella doesn’t cause problems, severe cases may require surgery. Signs of patellar luxation include: Limping Bunny-hopping A popping or cracking noise from the knee joint There’s no one-size-fits-all recommendation for feeding your Havapoo dog. Work with your veterinarian to develop a feeding plan that’snutritionally complete and balancedfor your pup’s age, weight, and health. Even the size of the kibble is important, as the Havapoo’s small teeth need small kibble. Havapoo puppies need frequent meals—three or four a day—to avoidhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Adult Havapoos can be fed two or three times a day. Your vet can help you determine the best schedule for your dog’s age. The nutrition label on your dog’s food bag includes a feeding guide that gives you a general idea ofhow much to feed your Havapoo, based on their weight. But for a more precise answer, ask your veterinarian. They will tailor their recommendation to your dog’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Keep in mind thatdog treatshave calories, too, and they should never make up more than 10% of your dog’s daily calorie requirements. If your Havapoo is eating a complete and balanced diet of dog food approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), they shouldn’t need supplementation in their diet. However,nutritional supplementsmay be used to treat or prevent certain health conditions. Given the parent breeds’ predisposition for developing periodontal disease, yourvet may recommend dental chewsas a precaution—though they won’t replace regular brushing. Talk to your veterinary team before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. Ultimately, your Havapoo’s personality will depend on which parent they favor. Though Havanese and Poodles both receive top marks forfriendliness, playfulness, adaptability, and intelligence, the latter tend to have higher energy levels andmental stimulation needs. Havanese are descendants of posh lap dogs, and Miniature and Toy Poodles come fromhunting dogs. What do these two breeds have in common? A need for close companionship—and their offspring is no different. Bored, lonely Havapoos with energy to burn are more likely to experienceseparation anxietyand engage in unwanted behaviors, such as excessive barking. It’s important to safely expose your Havapoo puppy to various animals, people, environments, activities, and objects during their first 16 weeks of life. This is a crucial learning period, andsocializing your puppycan help them feel comfortable in a wide variety of settings. Ask your veterinarian to list age-appropriate activities. Havapoos are brainy dogs that respond well to training, but their Havanese parent can be sensitive and their Poodle parent needs consistency. A lifelong,rewards-based training approachwill build the human-animal bond, while also providing much-needed mental and physical exercise. If you use treats as a reward during training, factor them into your dog’s daily calorie count. Play, toys, and other things your dog enjoys can also be used as rewards—and won’t make yourdog gain too much weight. Walking Swimming Fetch Food puzzles Hide-and-seek Nose work Obedience training Skills training Both of the Havapoo’s parents are known for their long fur. And while their impressive coats don’t shed very much, they do require daily maintenance. Good coat care is the foundation of good skin care. Matting can trap moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your Havapoo’s skin, so it’s important to keep their hair free from problems. Ask your veterinarianhow often you should bathe your Havapoo. Bathing your pup too often can strip their skin of healthy oils, and lead todryness and itchiness. Matting is an ever-looming problem with Havapoos, so daily brushing and regular trips to the groomer are musts. However, shorter haircuts can lighten your grooming load. Because both parent breeds areprone to eye issues, closely monitor your Havapoo’s eyes for signs of problems likecloudinessandinflammation. Keep the hair around their eyes trimmed to avoid irritation. Both parent breeds can also be predisposed totear staining. Tear stains typically aren’t a problem and can often just becleaned with a dog-safe wipe. Nevertheless, contact your veterinarian if you suddenly notice the characteristic reddish-brown streaks on your dog’s face, as they can sometimes indicate an underlying medical issue. Havapoos can beprone to ear infections, especially if they take after their Poodle parent andlove to swim. Ask your veterinarian how and how often you shouldclean your dog’s earsand whatear cleaning productsto use. If you see signs of infection (redness, odor, pain, itchiness), it’s time to visit the vet. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Havapoo puppy to your family: Can I provide a safe environment for a dog that can be easily injured by young children or other pets? Can I brush a dog’s coat at least once a day? Am I financially prepared to provide regular professional grooming services? Can I brush a dog’s teeth at least three times a week? Am I home enough to give a dog companionship? Do I have time to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise every day? Do I have the skills, patience, and dedication to train a dog using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 18 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Havapoo. Havapoos are a mix between a Havanese (7–13 pounds), and typically either a Miniature Poodle (10–15 pounds) or a Toy Poodle (4–6 pounds). A full-grown Havapoo shouldn’t weigh more than 15 pounds. Havapoos are the offspring of a Havanese and a Poodle, whileCavapoosare a cross between aCavalier King Charles Spanieland a Poodle. Havapoos are clever pups with a desire to please, making them highly trainable. Consistent, positive training that uses rewards instead of punishments is the best approach. Havapoos don’t shed much and can be a good fit for some people with allergies, though there’s no such thing as a trulyhypoallergenic dog. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians