SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/dachshund

Istock/slowmotiongliWhat Famously nicknamed the “hot dog” or “wiener dog,” Dachshunds (or Doxies, for short) are known for their long silhouette, short and muscular legs, brave and energetic personality, and for always being on the lookout. “Dachshund” comes from the German words for badger (dachs) and dog (hund), as these dogs were originallybred in 18th-century Germany to hunt badgers. Dachshunds were bred to beindependent huntersof dangerous prey. Because of this, Dachshund dogs can be brave to the point of carelessness and a bit tenacious, but their charming nature and famous long-and-low body make them one ofthe most popular dog breeds in the U. A Dachshund (pronounced “dakk-snd”) can be willful, headstrong, playful, and mischievous. But the breed is also smart and attentive. Dachshunds come in a wide variety of colors, patterns, and coat types. There are also two Dachshund sizes: Standard Dachshundsweigh 16–32 pounds and stand 8–9 inches tall Miniature Dachshundsare under 11 pounds and stand just 5–6 inches tall Although they aresmall dogs, Dachshunds need regular exercise to stay fit and build strong muscles to support and protect their long back, which is vulnerable to injury. Dachshunds are not built for extensive jumping, twisting, or anything that puts strain on their back. To help keep your Dachshund’s back healthy and prevent injuries, try to limit their jumping by installingpet stairs or rampsnear furniture and beds. Keeping your Dachshundat a healthy weightalso helps minimize the risk of a back injury. The typical Dachshund lifespan is 12–16 years, aboutaverage for a smaller dog breed. But the breed is, unfortunately, susceptible to several health conditions throughout their life. Intervertebral disc disease (IVDD)in Dachshunds is caused by a bulging or slipped disc within the vertebral column of the spine. As many as25% of Dachshunds develop IVDD in their lifetime, and it can lead topermanent paralysisif not treated quickly. Bring your Dachshund to the vet if you notice a change in the way they move or any of the following symptoms: Back pain Trouble walking Limping Holding head/neck down Dragging paws Scuffed toenails Problems urinating or defecating Depending on the severity of the disease, treatment withanti-inflammatoryandpain medicationsmay be recommended, as well as muscle relaxants and strict cage rest (no playing, running, or jumping—only short, leashed walks to go to the bathroom are allowed). Surgery or other treatments for more severe IVDD are often necessary to help dogs regain use of their legs and other functions affected by a slipped disc. Some dogs never recover fully despite treatment. Pull quote: The number one health issue in a Dachshund is back ailments due to the dog’s long spine, muscular and bowed legs, and low-to-the-ground stature. Dachshunds are predisposed toobesitybecause of their small size and need to restrict some forms of exercise. Dachshunds are also prone to disorders that impact their mobility, such as IVDD and orthopedic conditions. These conditions make it harder for your dog to move, which can lead to weight gain. It’s important to have your veterinarian examine and weigh your Dachshund at least once a year to ensure they remain healthy. You can schedule an appointment with your veterinarian to find out how many calories your dog needs each day and to create a weight loss plan for your Dachshund, if needed. Aluxating patellais common in small dogs, including Dachshunds. This is caused by the kneecap slipping out of its normal position, and the condition often occurs simultaneously in both hind legs. You may notice your Dachshund limping on their hind legs, or you may see a “skip” or “bunny hop” to their gait when they walk. Depending on the severity, some dogs do not require any treatment, but others may need anti-inflammatory and pain medications or even surgery. Giving yourdog joint protection supplementsand keeping them at a healthy weight may help prevent secondary issues. Dapple Dachshund puppies (dogs that have a coat mottled or spotted with patches of white and color) may be born deaf, especially if both of their parents had dappled coats as well. While there is no cure for this,deaf dogscan live long, healthy lives. Small dogs such as Dachshunds are more prone toperiodontal disease, in which plaque and tartar build up on a dog’s teeth, leading to gum inflammation, bacterial infections, and tooth loss. The best way to prevent this is tobrush your dog’s teeth daily. Your veterinarian can recommend thebest dog toothpastes and toothbrushes, along with other oral health products likedental chewsand water additives. Pet parents must also have their Dachshund’steeth professionally cleanedon a schedule recommended by their veterinarian. Idiopathic epilepsyis the presence of seizures without a known cause. The seizures commonly begin when a dog is young, between 1 and 5 years old, and this condition is thought to be genetic. There are two main kinds ofseizures in Dachshunds: generalized and focal. Generalized seizuresaffect the entire body. Your dog is not aware of their surroundings, often experiences convulsions, and may urinate or defecate during the seizure. Focal seizuresare more subtle; they can cause chewing movements or twitching of the face or a limb, for example. If you notice any seizure activity or suspect your Dachshund has had a seizure, have them examined by a veterinarian as soon as possible. The vet will perform a complete physical and neurologic examination, runblood work, dourine testing, and possiblyrecommend an X-rayorultrasoundto rule out other possible causes of seizures, such astoxins. Anti-convulsant medications can control these types of seizures in dogs. Eye problems such ascataracts,glaucoma, andprogressive retinal atrophy (PRA)are all common in Dachshunds and can causeblindness in your dog. Common symptoms of eye problems are: Cloudy eyes Red, swollen, or irritated eyes (with or withoutdischarge) Bumping into things Anxiety or hesitation in new places Unwillingness to go up or down stairs or climb on or off furniture Pawing at face Confused, dazed, or startled behavior PRA is not treatable and affected dogs will lose their vision. Cataracts are treated with surgery, and glaucoma can be managed with medications, though surgery is sometimes needed. Your veterinarian can monitor for these eye issues, and Dachshund breeders can screen for them. Dachshunds are dolichocephalic (long-faced) dogs. This type of anatomy puts them at increased risk of fungal, bacterial, or other infections in their nasal and sinus cavities. Make an appointment with your veterinarian if you notice your dog: Sneezing Having nasal discharge Rubbing their nose Dachshunds require a high-quality, age-appropriate diet (puppy, adult, orsenior) to meet their nutritional needs. Feed your Dachshund anAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)-compliant diet, which ensures that ingredients in the food meet established standards. Your vet can recommend thebest dog foodfor your pup’s age, health, and lifestyle. Some brands, like Royal Canin, have breed-specific dog food made just for Dachshunds. Ask your vet if this is a good fit for your pup. Your vet might alsorecommend a dental dietformulated to reduce the amount of plaque and tartar that accumulates on your Dachshund’s teeth. In general, Dachshund puppies should be fed three to four times a day, while adult Dachshunds should eat twice daily. If your pup eats too quickly and gets an upset stomach, useslow feeder bowlsto slow them down. How much you feed your dogis determined by the specific food your Dachshund eats and your pup’s health and activity level. Your veterinarian and the feeding instructions on the bag of food will help you find the right amount to keep your Dachshund at a healthy weight. Overweight Dachshund dogs are at a higher risk for back injuries and other diseases. Dogs eating an AAFCO-compliant diet will receive all needed nutrition from their food. But your vet might recommend dietarysupplements for your Dachshundto support your dog’s health, including: Glucosamine, chondroitin, and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) supplements to promote joint and back health. Omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil), which have anti-inflammatory properties and promote healthy joints, skin, and coat. Certain antioxidants and vitamins may support eye health. Dachshunds are playful andfriendly dogsthat can makegreat pets for a first-time dog parent. They love mental challenges likepuzzle gamesor scent-tracking sports. However, be careful with them during high-energy activities to avoid back injuries. The Dachshund’s spunky temperament also means playtime with children should be supervised, as they may play too rough for young kids. Children must also betaught how to interact safely with dogs. Even though they are small, Dachshunds need regular exercise to stay fit and build strong muscles to support and protect their back. They should lead active lifestyles and havemultiple daily walks, playtime, and activities to mentally stimulate them throughout the day. Dachshunds aregood dogs for apartmentsand small houses, but they dotend to bark a lot. Training canhelp manage their barking habits. Thanks to their history as hunting dogs, Dachshunds have an excellent sense of smell and astrong prey drive. Because of this, they might not do well in homes with smaller animals that they might see as something to chase after. Dachshunddogs also like to dig, which may cause damage to your plants and yard. Keep that in mind and provide alternative activities for your dog. Dachshunds aresmart dogs, but they are also independent and often willful, so they can be a challenge to train. Always encourage your dog withpositive reinforcement during trainingand keep sessions short. If they lose patience and get distracted by a sound or smell, take a break and continue their training later. Dachshundpuppies must be socializedconsistently when young so they learn to be confident, good-mannered dogs that don’t bark or chase inappropriately. Earthdog Scent walks Nose work Puzzle toys Hide-and-seek with treats Walks Dachshunds can have three different coat types: Longhaired Dachshundshave a thick coat that’s typically slightly wavy, and the hair is longer on their neck, chest, and underside. Smooth Dachshundshave a short, smooth, and shiny coat. Wirehaired Dachshundshave a coarse outer coat with a softer undercoat. All Dachshunds shed regularly throughout the year, though not as intensely as some other breeds. Healthy Dachshunds don’tneed to be bathed often. Bathing once every few months is usually sufficient, but ask your vet for the best guidance. Grooming varies depending on your Dachshund dog’s coat type. Wirehaired Dachshundscan be plucked or hand-stripped a few times a year to help maintain their coat’s rough texture. Aside from that ritual, they are easy to maintain with an occasional trim of their beard and eyebrows. Brushing their coat several times a week is needed as well; slicker brushes and bristle brushes are also good picks for wirehaired dogs. No matter their coat type, a Dachshund’s belly might need more frequent brushing because they’re so close to the ground and can easily pick up debris. All dogs have a natural eye pigment, called porphyrin, in their tears that turns a brown-reddish color. Use a special eye wipe—such asAngels’ Eyes products—to clean anytear stainsyour Dachshund develops. While some tear staining is normal, talk to your veterinarian if you notice any changes in your dog’s eyes or vision. Ear infectionsare common in Dachshund dogs. Moisture can be trapped inside the ear, causing bacteria and/or yeast to overpopulate, leading to an ear infection. Allergies also increase a dog's risk for ear infections. A general guideline for ear care is to check your dog’s ears for problems at least once a month. You can look at their ears when you are bathing them, brushing them, or trimming their nails. Ask your vethow to clean your dog’s earsand whichear-cleaning productsto use. Dachshunds can be great companion pets for people in smaller homes or apartments—as long as they get enough stimulation through walks and play every day. However, they are quite vocal dogs, so you will need to put in some training to redirect barking behaviors. This breed is also very susceptible to back injuries, so any prospective owners will need to be prepared to take precautions to help support their Dachshund's back health. It’s extremely important that Dachshunds do not become obese, which can make them more at risk for back injuries. This is a rambunctious and smart dog breed, somental stimulationand consistent training are important to help build good behavior. Make sure you have time to dedicate yourself to this before bringing home a Dachshund puppy. Dachshunds can make great dogs for the right family. They need a family with older children and that has the time to keep a dog active, stimulated, and trained. The typical Dachshund life expectancy is 12–16 years. Yes, Dachshunds shed moderately year-round. Routine grooming can help reduce the amount of fur that ends up in your home. Yes, Dachshunds are undeniably smart and are great at solving problems. Most love puzzles and other interactive toys to play with every day. The average Dachshund puppy price ranges from $500 to more than $2,000, depending on the dog’s markings/coat, breeder, pedigree papers, and health screenings. Dachshund rescue organizations and local shelters can also help you find Dachshunds for adoption. The correct Dachshund pronunciation is “daak-snd. ” No, do not work with a breeder that advertises teacup Dachshunds. Teacup dogsare typically bred to be as small as possible, with few (if any) considerations to the dog’s health. Mini Dachshunds and even standard-size Dachshunds are already quite small. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Barri Morrison was born and raised and currently resides in Ft. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians