SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/american-hairless-terrier

Sarah Kloepple lenanet/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images No hair? No problem. That’s a sentiment shared by those who love the American Hairless Terrier, the onlyhairless dog breednative to the U. This is also a relatively new dog breed—American Hairless Terriers only date back to the ’70s, when a hairless puppy was born into a litter ofRat Terriers, according to theAmerican Hairless Terrier Club of America (AHTCA). Standing 12–16 inches tall and weighing between 12 and 28 pounds, American Hairless Terriers are intelligent, high-energy, and playful dogs. They may also be a good fit for some people with allergies and are sometimes considered to behypoallergenic dogs(though there’s really no such thing). Though the cute American Hairless Terrier doesn’t have any fur (aside from eyebrows and whiskers found on some pups), that doesn’t mean these dogs don’t need grooming. It’s important to keep their skin moisturized, protected from hazards, and clean. Special care should also be paid to their teeth, ears, and nails. Regular exercise andmental stimulationare other musts for this breed—without them, thesesmart dogswith abundant energy can develop undesirable and destructive behaviors, likedigging, to keep themselves entertained. These dogs can be great playmates for children thanks to their rambunctious energy. Overall, American Hairless Terriers are a lively, intelligent, andfriendly breed, and theirsmall sizemakes themgreat apartment dogs. American Hairless Terriers are typicallyhealthy dogswho live for 14–16 years on average. However, like all dog breeds, some may experience health issues. To minimize risk for some diseases, purchase an American Hairless Terrier puppy from areputable breederand keep up withregular veterinary wellness exams. A common condition in small-breed dogs,patella luxationis characterized by the kneecap no longer sitting properly in the knee joint—it moves (luxates) to either side as a dog walks or runs. Mild cases may only be noticed by your veterinarian during a physical exam, while more severe cases may result in a bunny-hopping gait. Many cases of patella luxation are managed medically withjoint supplementsand weight management. However, severe cases may need surgery to correct. American Hairless Terriers can developheart disease, particularly as they get older. The first sign may be a heart murmur your veterinarian detects, but symptoms can also include: Coughing Weight loss Fatigue Fainting from excitement or exercise It’s also possible for a dog to have heart problems that show no symptoms. Work with your veterinarian to manage your American Hairless Terrier’s heart disease. Your dog may need changes to their diet and exercise routine, and lifelong medications are sometimes prescribed. The lens is a small, clear disc inside the eye that helps dogs see by focusing light on the retina. Primary lens luxationis when the lens falls out of its normal position, and the condition commonly occurs when affected dogs are 3–8 years old. Symptoms include tearing, squinting, andcloudiness in the eye. The condition can be treated with surgery. American Hairless Terriers need to eat a dog food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional guidelines. American Hairless Terrier puppies should eat apuppy-specific fooduntil they’re 1 year old, when they cantransition to adult food. American Hairless Terrier puppies under 4 months old will benefit fromfrequent, small meals(four or five per day) to avoidlow blood sugar, which can be seen in small-breed puppies. Once your American Hairless Terrier is fully grown, two meals a day should be enough to keep them healthy and satisfied. To give them some of the mental stimulation they need, consider using apuzzle feederto keep your dog busy while they eat. Adog’s exact calorie requirementsdepend on their age, health, lifestyle, and other factors. Because American Hairless Terriers are a small breed, it’s important to keep them at a healthy weight to avoid orthopedic and metabolic issues as they age. Your dog’s food packaging has a feeding guide that typically recommends the total amount of food that should be given in a 24-hour period. You can use this as a general guide, but always talk to your veterinarian for the best advice about your specific pooch. Dogs who eat an AAFCO-compliant dog food should receive all the nutrients they need. But because American Hairless Terriers can develop joint and eye issues, your vet may prescribe certaindog supplementsdepending on your particular pup’s needs. Talk to your veterinarian if you have any concerns about your dog’s nutrition, and never give your pet a supplement without a vet’s oversight. American Hairless Terriers are known to be intelligent and full of energy. While they’re content being indoor lap dogs, they still require regular exercise. They’re very trainable, so keeping their mind occupied with obedience and trick training is a good place to start. According to the AHTCA, these dogs generally get along well with children. But it’s still important to supervise young children at all times with any dog, regardless of breed, and toteach kids how to appropriately interact with small petslike the American Hairless Terrier. Like allterrier dog breeds, American Hairless Terriers are known to be affectionate, playful, and inquisitive. Regular walksand indoor playtime will keep them happy. Also like all terriers, these dogs can be watchful andbark to alert their familyto visitors or strange noises. Proper training, exercise, and mental stimulation canhelp reduce excess barking. The American Hairless Terrier’s temperament lends itself well to training because they are energetic and eager to please. They thrive withobedienceandagility training. Keep your training sessions short and full ofpositive reinforcement. Beginsocializing your American Hairless Terrier puppyas soon as you bring them home. Puppies who are exposed to new people, places, animals, and experiences will be better adjusted and more confident in new situations throughout their life. A properly socialized American Hairless Terrier will do well around new people and with other pets. Agility Obedience training Walking Hiking Puzzle toys Cuddling on the couch Because they lack a full coat, American Hairless Terriers don’t require the grooming routine many other dog breeds have. However, their skin needs regular attention. (Fun fact: They’re one of the fewdogs who can sweat!) Because their bare skin makes them more exposed to the elements, hairless dogs like the American Hairless Terrier need a regular skin care routine. To avoidsunburns, protect their skin withdog-friendly sunscreenor by blocking the sun’s rays withclothing. Theyalso get cold easily when the temperature drops, so keep them warm with adoggy sweaterorcoatwhen outdoors and ablanketwhen indoors. To avoid skin issues, American Hairless Terriers alsoneed regular baths, preferably every week. Use lukewarm water and mild shampoo, and inspect them for dry spots, redness, orflaky areas on their skin. Keeping their skin moisturized is also important; usedog-friendly lotion or cream. Your American Hairless Terrier might also beprone to ache. Usingmedicated wipescan help withskin infections, including acne. Talk with your vet to see how you can help reduce acne on your dog. American Hairless Terriers shouldn’t need special eye care. But if you see your dog pawing at their eye, squinting, or having eye discharge, take them to the vet to check for an eye infection. Keep an eye out for ear-scratching, head-shaking, discharge, or a bad smell coming from your American Hairless Terrier’s ears—these can all besigns of an ear infection. To prevent infections, ask your vet how often you shouldclean your dog’s earsand getrecommendations for ear-cleaning products. The American Hairless Terrier makes an excellent companion, whether you’re in a house or apartment. Just be sure to give them regular exercise and mental stimulation, whether that’s a puzzle feeder, a daily walk through the neighborhood, or a run through a fun agility course. With proper socialization and early training, these terriers are friendly and affectionate dogs. Just remember that, due to their hairlessness, they require a more involved skin care routine than other breeds—but no coat care. Yes, a well-trained, socialized, and mentally stimulated American Hairless Terrier makes a great pet. They’re content both outside enjoying activities and inside curling up next to their humans. Yes, they definitely can be! They’re known to be very affectionate terriers who form strong bonds with their pet parents. American Hairless Terriers can be vocal, especially around strange noises or humans they don’t already know. This is why training is important to curb unwanted behaviors, such as excessive barking. WRITTEN BY Sarah Kloepple Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians