SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/shih-poo

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA What do you get when you mix the lovable (and loving!)Shih Tzuwith the curly-coated, cleverToy Poodle? A Shih-poo! That’s the most common name for this cutie, though you may also hear this mixed breed referred to as a “Shoodle. ” The Shih-poo is a relatively new mix and is not yet recognized as an official breed by the American Kennel Club. Without a breed standard, it can be difficult to make absolute statements regarding the Shih-poo’s temperament and appearance. However, the two parent breeds are well established and serve as a helpful template for making predictions. According to theShih Tzu breed standard, the “sole purpose” of the breed is to be a “companion and house pet. ” Thus, a properly socialized Shih Tzu is “outgoing, happy, affectionate, friendly, and trusting towards all. ” The Toy Poodle, on the other hand, is described by thebreed standardas “very active” and “intelligent” with an “air of distinction and dignity peculiar to himself. ” When these temperaments combine, you can typically expect a Shih-poo dog that’s smart, friendly, and confident. Small in stature, low in shedding,high in intelligence, and with moderate energy and exercise requirements (around 30 minutes a day), Shih-poos can be a great choice for new pet parents and apartment dwellers. Their friendly, outgoing demeanor means the breed can do well with family members of all ages (including children and older adults) and even with other dogs and cats. In return, Shih-poos need plenty of companionship, regular grooming, rewards-based training, and an indoor home. As for their appearance, there are very few definites. Shih-poo coats can vary in length, can be straight or curly, and can come in a variety (and even combination) of colors, including white, black, and brown. But there’s one characteristic youcancount on: The Shih-poo size is small. Shih Tzus weigh 8–18 pounds, Toy Poodles range 4–6 pounds, and both breeds’ maximum height is around 10 inches. A Shih-poo, full grown, will stay around this tiny size. Both Shih Tzu and Toy Poodles arehealthy breedswith life expectancies of 13–17 years and 10–18 years, respectively, and the Shih-poo’s lifespan is similar. Still, like all dogs, the two breeds are prone to various health conditions that can be passed on to their offspring. Hip dysplasiais a condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, leading to a loose joint anddegenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis). Both Shih Tzu and Toy Poodles are prone to this condition. Mild cases are treated with interventions including physical therapy and anti-inflammatory drugs, but severe cases may require surgery. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to get up or jump Shifting of weight to front legs Loss of muscle mass in the back legs Hip pain When the patella (kneecap) shifts outside its normal groove within the femur (thigh bone), it’s termedpatellar luxation(dislocation). This condition is more prevalent in smaller breeds. While in some dogs a luxating patella doesn’t cause problems, severe cases may require surgery. Signs of patellar luxation include: Limping Bunny-hopping A popping or cracking noise from the knee joint Periodontal disease(or gum disease) is a progressive condition where bacteria accumulate in the mouth, leading to damage to the dog’s gums, bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs, small and toy breeds are especially prone to the problem. Mild cases may simply require aprofessional dental cleaning, while severely affected teeth must be extracted. Frequent tooth brushing at home(at least three times a week) and regular professional cleanings are the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Shih Tzu are prone to several eye conditions, including cataracts, dry eye syndrome, and progressive retinal atrophy (PRA). Toy Poodles are also more susceptible to developing PRA. Cataracts:Normal, healthy lenses are clear and allow light to easily pass through to the retina. Cataracts cause the lens to become cloudy, obstructing light from reaching the retina and causing vision loss. If you notice cloudiness or signs of vision loss (like clumsiness) in your dog, notify your veterinarian. Cataracts are progressive but can be treated with surgery. Dry eye syndrome: Dry eye syndrome, also known as keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), occurs when a dog doesn’t produce enough tears to properly lubricate their eyes and protect them from infection and irritations. Signs of dry eye syndrome includered and inflamed eyes, pain, redness and swelling of the tissues around the eye, increased blinking, and a mucus-like discharge on the cornea. Most cases are treated with a medication that stimulates tear production. Progressive retinal atrophy:Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) is an umbrella term for a family of eye disorders in which the rods and cones of the retina either don’t develop properly in puppies (early-onset PRA) or begin deteriorating in adulthood (late-onset PRA). Signs of disease include reluctance to enter dark spaces, clumsiness, and cataracts. There is no cure for PRA and the condition eventually leads to blindness. Both parents of the Shih-poo are genetically predisposed to developingvon Willebrand disease (vWD), a common bleeding disorder. It’s caused by a deficiency in von Willebrand Factor proteins, which decreases a dog’s ability to form a clot if they’re injured and bleeding. The condition can’t be cured, but it can be managed with blood transfusions. Signs of vWD include: Excessive, prolonged, or spontaneous bleeding Blood in the urine or feces Nosebleeds Bruising Anemia (red blood cell deficiency) Legg-Calvé-Perthes diseaseis a condition in which the head of the femur bone spontaneously deteriorates. This causes the hip joint to disintegrate, leading to bone and joint inflammation (osteoarthritis). While the exact cause is unknown, it most often affects toy, miniature, andsmall-breed dogs. Many affected dogs require surgery to remove part of the femur, followed by a rigorous exercise and physical therapy regimen. Signs of Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease include: Gradual lameness Lifting affected limb(s) when walking Pain when moving the hip joint Loss of thigh muscle on affected limb(s) There’s no “one-size-fits-all” recommendation for feeding your Shih-poo. You’ll need to work with your veterinarian to develop a feeding plan that’s nutritionally complete and balanced for your pup’s age, weight, and health. Even the size of the kibble is important, as small teeth need small kibble. Shih-poo puppies need frequent meals—three or four a day—to avoidhypoglycemia(low blood sugar). Adult dogs can be fed less frequently, typically two or three times a day. Your vet can help you determine the best schedule for your Shih-poo. The nutrition label on your dog’s food bag includes a feeding guide that gives you a general idea of how much to feed your Shih-poo based on their weight. But for a more precise answer, ask your veterinarian. Your vet will tailor their recommendation to your dog’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Be sure to factor any treats into your Shih-poo’s daily calories, too. If your Shih-poo is eating a complete and balanced diet of dog food approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO), they shouldn’t need anything extra. However, nutritional supplements and even prescription diets are sometimes used to treat or prevent certain health conditions. Given the parent breeds’ predisposition for developing periodontal disease, your vet may recommenddental chewsas a precaution—though they won’t replace regular brushing! Talk to your veterinary team before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. It’s convenient that Shih-poos are so compact and portable, because they would very much like to spend all day by your side. Running errands? That’s on their list, too. Watching television? You’re not going to do that alone. When properly socialized and trained, Shih-poos can become fast friends with humans and other animals alike. In addition to sharing everyday life with them, you’ll need to devote around 30 minutes a day tomental stimulationand physical exercise to satisfy their brain and body. Boredom can lead tounwanted behaviors like barkingandchewing. All dogs go through a critical development period from birth to around 16 weeks of age. During this time, they learn how to interact with humans and other animals. Talk to your Shih-poo breeder about how they approach socialization. If done well, it can pay big dividends in adulthood. Both Shih Tzu and Toy Poodles are quite trainable, in part because Shih Tzu are so eager to please and Poodles are so eager to show off their smarts. The Shih-poo combines both qualities, though their confidence can lead to a bit of willfulness at times. Consistent positive reinforcement trainingthat uses rewards instead of punishment is the best way to teach your pup while building the human-animal bond. Just remember that if you’re using treats as a reward, you need to factor them into your dog’s daily calorie count. Play,toys, and other things your dog enjoys can also be used as rewards. Neighborhood walks Obedience training Skills training Food puzzles Nose work Medium. Any of these adjectives could describe a Shih-poo’s coat. But, while the breed is low on shedding, that doesn’t mean they’re low-maintenance. It takes work to keep their luscious locks free from tangles. Good coat care is the foundation of good skin care. Matting can trap moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your Shih-poo’s skin, so it’s essential to keep their hair free from problems. Ask your veterinarianhow often you should bathe your Shih-poo. Keep in mind that bathing your pup too often can strip their skin of healthy oils and lead to dryness and itchiness. Expect your pup to require daily brushing and a trip to the groomer every one to two months. Shorter haircuts can make your brushing duties easier. Because both parent breeds are prone to eye issues, closely monitor your Shih-poo’s eyes for signs of problems like cloudiness and inflammation. Keep the hair around their eyes trimmed to avoid irritation. Shih Tzus and Toy Poodles can also be prone totear staining. If you suddenly notice the characteristic reddish-brown stains on your dog’s face, contact your veterinarian, as this can sometimes indicate an underlying medical issue. That said, tear stains typically aren’t problematic and simply need to be cleaned with adog-safe wipe. Between the Shih Tzu’s floppy ears and the Toy Poodle’s long ear canals, Shih-poos are at risk of developing the sameear infectionsthat can plague their parents. Ask your veterinarian how and how often you shouldclean your dog’s ears, and remember to keep ear hairs trimmed. If you see signs of infection (redness, odor, pain, itchiness), it’s time to visit the vet. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Shih-poo to your family: Can I brush a dog’s coat at least once a day? Am I financially prepared to provide professional grooming services every one to two months? Can I brush a dog’s teeth at least three times a week? Am I home enough to give a dog companionship? And am I OK with having a canine shadow follow me around the house? Do I have the time to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise every day? Do I have the skills, patience, and dedication to train a dog using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 18 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Shih-poo. There are white, cream, red, brown, and black Shih-poos—and some who are any color in between. Their coat can be straight or in tight curls. There is widespread variation in how they can look, thanks to their parent breeds. Is the Shih-poo a good pet foryou? That’s tougher to answer! The breed tends to be highly adaptable and friendly with people of all ages (including older adults and young children) and with other pets. If you’re willing and able to provide an indoor home, close companionship, daily physical and mental stimulation, regular grooming to avoid matting, and consistent positive training, the Shih-poo may be a good fit for you. Both of the Shih-poo’s parent breeds have long hair. But despite their furry features, they don’t shed very much. This can be helpful for people with allergies, thoughno dog is truly hypoallergenic. If you’re concerned about allergies, spend time with the breed before bringing a Shih-poo puppy home. The average Shih-poo lifespan is anywhere between 10 and 18 years. Featured Image: iStock/Roon Z/Wirestock WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians