SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/miniature-american-shepherd

Miniature American Shepherds areextremely intelligentand loving companions. This small herding breed was created in California during the 1960s, according to theMiniature American Shepherd Club of America (MASCA), by breeding the smallestAustralian Shepherd. The goal was to create a dog breed that mimics the appearance, personality, and intellect of an Australian Shepherd, just in a smaller size. A full-grown Miniature American Shepherd stands 13–18 inches tall and weighs 20–40 pounds. In comparison, Australian Shepherds are 18–23 inches tall and 40–65 pounds. Miniature American Shepherds makegreat family dogsdue to their affection, intellect, and good temperament around children and other pets. They are athletic and have a lot of energy; because of this, Miniature American Shepherds need to be given jobs to stay active and prevent boredom. They enjoygoing on runs,hikes, orlong walks, as well as participating in dog sports where they can compete against other dogs. Because of their smarts and eagerness to please their family members, Miniature American Shepherds are highly trainable and pick up cues quickly. The Miniature American Shepherd’s double coat is medium in length and comes in a variety of colors, including black, red, and merle. Their fur does shed a lot andcan become matted, so this breed needs frequent brushing. The average Miniature American Shepherdlifespan is 12–13 years, and they’re considered to be agenerally healthy breed. However, like all dogs, the breed is known to have a few health issues. It’s important to work with a Miniature American Shepherd breeder who genetically tests their dogs to ensure they will not pass down health issues to their puppies. Purchasingpet insurance for your puppymay also be a good investment. Collie eye anomalyis a congenital eye disorder in which structures in the back of the eye do not develop properly. This condition can be detected by a veterinary ophthalmologist through a routine eye exam on Miniature American Shepherd puppies as young as 6 weeks of age. Some dogs with collie eye anomaly are asymptomatic, while others can be blind. There is no treatment available. Good breeders will have their dogs’ eyes examined and/or be genetically tested for this condition to make sure that affected dogs are not bred. Progressive retinal atrophyis a disease where the eye’s retina slowly degenerates, leading to blindness. This condition is usually diagnosed in Miniature American Shepherds when they are 3–9 years old. There is no cure for PRA, but blind dogs can still live long, happy lives with proper care. Acataract is a cloudy lenswithin the eye. Small cataracts are only visible with the aid of an ophthalmoscope, while large cataracts can be easy to see, as the pupil will look completely white. The larger the cataract, the more significant the loss of vision. Miniature American Shepherds can develop juvenile cataracts at a young age. Cataracts are usually hereditary, so breeders should not breed Miniature American Shepherds with a family history of cataracts. Surgery to remove the cataracts can restore eyesight. Another eye disorder in Miniature American Shepherds is an iris coloboma, a hole in the iris that is present at birth. A coloboma can vary in size, and dogs with large colobomas may be sensitive to light and squint on sunny days. There is no cure, but treatment is not needed as this condition by itself isn’t painful and doesn’t progress. Hip dysplasiais an inherited condition where the hip joint doesn’t properly align. This can cause pain and, eventually,arthritis. Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hip joints. Some Miniature American Shepherds are born with congenital hip dysplasia, though this is rare. Others can develop this condition during their senior years. Symptoms include: Lameness Slowness to rise from a lying position “Bunny-hopping” gait when running Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting up Reputable Miniature American Shepherd breeders make sure their dogs are screened for this genetic condition, so it’s best to purchase a puppy from a breeder that has had their dogs certified with aPennHIP evaluation. Hip dysplasia can be managed withjoint supplementsand certain medications. But in serious cases, surgery may be required. Aluxating patellais when a dog’s kneecap moves, or luxates, out of place, most often due to the shallow groove in the femur. There are varying degrees of kneecap luxation, and the most severe requires orthopedic surgery. Symptoms include: Limping Bowlegged stance Cracking or popping sounds when the knee is bent Miniature American Shepherds should be evaluated for patellar luxation before breeding. Miniature American Shepherds can carry the mutation in theMDR1 gene. This mutation can cause them to have severe, sometimes life-threatening, side effects to certain medications such asivermectin,Galliprant®, butorphanol, and somechemotherapy drugs. All Miniature American Shepherds should be tested to see if they carry this genetic mutation. If your dog is diagnosed, it’s important to notify your local veterinarian so certain medications are avoided. During the first 12 months of life, Miniature American Shepherd puppies should be fed a medium-breed,high-quality puppy foodthat’s calorie-dense to allow for proper growth. At one year of age, their diet should beslowly transitioned over five to seven daysto an adult medium-breed dog formula. When a Miniature American Shepherd hits their senior years starting (around 8 years of age), it’s best totransition to a senior dietthat contains joint support. Miniature American Shepherd dogs should be fed two meals a day, one in the morning and one in the evening. If your Miniature American Shepherd eats too quickly, buy aslow feeder bowlto slow them down at mealtime. It’s best to follow the feeding guidelines on the dog food packaging, but your veterinarian can determine the proper portion size to feed your Miniature American Shepherd. Your dog’s ideal body weightand life stage are important factors in determining proper food portions. Always measure out the food for each meal to ensure you’re feeding your pup the correct amount. Your Miniature American Shepherd’s daily diet should consist mostly ofAAFCO-compliant dog food(90%), with only 10% of calories from treats. Miniature American Shepherds should receive all essential nutrients in their AAFCO-approved dog food, so they shouldn’t need supplements. However, sometimes a veterinarian will recommend a supplement for your dog as needed. If your Miniature American Shepherd has a luxating patella or hip dysplasia, your veterinarian may recommend a joint supplement as well as anomega-3 fish oil supplement. Never give your pup a supplement without veterinary guidance. This breed has a lot of energy and needs at least one hour (though ideally two) of exercise every day. Along with physical activity, Miniature American Shepherds are happiest when their minds are engaged with activities likedog sports, jogging with their favorite human, or running freely in a fenced-in yard. They are good with children and other pets but should be supervised initially when they are getting to know a new family member. Introducing your Miniature American Shepherdto another dogorto a catshould be done slowly and with proper supervision. Miniature American Shepherds are less likely to have behavioral issues if they participate in training classes and obedience classes when they are puppies. This breed can be known to bark, butearly socializationandpositive reinforcement trainingcan help keep your pup frombarking excessively. Their devotion to their family members can make themdevelop separation anxietywhen left alone. It’s important tocrate train Miniature American Shepherd puppiesat an early age and provideinteractive toysto keep their mind occupied when they’re left unattended. Miniature American Shepherds are intelligent and eager-to-please dogs, which makes them easy to train. But that doesn’t mean training is something to slack on; puppies need early and consistent training with positive reinforcement that uses treats and praise as rewards for good behavior. Enrolling your pup into a socialization class and/or puppy obedience class can help them grow up to be a well-behaved dog. Tracking Rally obedience Agility Frisbee Dock diving Herding Miniature American Shepherds have a double coat; the outer layer consists of long fur, while the inner coat is thick for insulation. They shed a moderate amount year-round, and their fur needs to be brushed regularly to control shedding andprevent matting. Miniature American Shepherds do not require special skin care and onlyneed baths when they are dirty. Contact your vet if you notice any changes in your dog’s skin. The Miniature American Shepherd needs to be brushed at least weekly to control shedding and minimize matting. This breed sheds year-round with one or two heavy shedding seasons (in the spring and/or fall) every year. During this time, their coat should be brushed every day. Because Miniature American Shepherds are at risk for several eye conditions, a physical exam should be performed by a veterinarian annually to screen for eye conditions. A referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist may be recommended by your veterinarian if there is an abnormality found in one or both eyes. Contact your vet if you notice any changes in your dog’s eyes. Symptoms that something may be wrong include: Redness Discharge Cloudiness Changes in vision (for example, bumping into things) Miniature American Shepherds are not as prone to frequentear infectionsas some other dog breeds. That said, they can occasionally develop infections. Cleaning your dog’s earswith anear cleaner that contains a drying agentcan help minimize ear infections. It’s best to clean their ears after a bath or other water activity, like if yourdog goes for a swim. Miniature American Shepherds are loving family dogs that can do well around other pets and children alike. But they are also athletic and smart dogs that need exercise and mental stimulation to be happy. A bored Miniature American Shepherd can become destructive and bark excessively, so make sure you’re able to give your pup a job to do, like a dog sport. The perfect home for this breed has a large fenced-in yard where they can run around with other dogs. Even though Miniature American Shepherds are small, living in an apartment would not be ideal for them—unless this breed is able to participate in daily exercise, dog sports, or activities outside of the house that will meet their mental and physical needs. The Miniature American Shepherd stands 13–18 inches tall at the shoulders, depending upon the gender. Yes, the Miniature American Shepherds are great family companions. They are smart, easy to train, and do well with small children and other pets. They are also easy to travel with due to their small size. Miniature American Shepherds look like miniature Australian Shepherds; they both have the same build, coat, and temperament. But Miniature American Shepherds are smaller than their Australian Shepherd ancestors. Featured Image: Adobe/otsphoto WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians