SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/pekingese

Bred to live in palaces with the royal classes of ancient China, the affectionate Pekingese has a long and noble history. The toy breed was created around the same time as other flat-faced breeds like thePugandShih Tzu, according to thePekingese Club of America. The first Pekingese were brought to the West as loot in 1860. Pekingese have a distinctive coat that is longest around the neck, giving it the appearance of a lion’s mane. Today, they make affectionate and loyal companions who appear proud of their lineage. Pekingese are dense little dogs that stand 6–9 inches high and weigh up to 14 pounds. Most Pekingese dogs are affectionate, outgoing, and especially loyal to the ones they love most. While they require moderate exercise, Pekingese are short-faced dogs (a brachycephalic breed). This means they are moreprone to overheating, so exercise in hot weather should be avoided. Along with making sure their pup stays cool, Pekingese pet parents need to spend a lot of time brushing the breed’s thick double coat to prevent matting. The typical Pekingese lifespan is 12–14 years. While mostly healthy, Pekingese are predisposed to a few health conditions. Investing in pet health insuranceprior to the diagnosis of any health concern could help make treatment more accessible. While the Pekingese’s smooshed face is cute, its structural abnormalities cause these dogs to havebrachycephalic airway syndrome. This affects the dog’s ability to breathe normally and cool down, and it may lead to lower-respiratory and gastrointestinal diseases. Many dogs with this condition willbreathe loudly and snore, and they are also at higher risk of complications when under anesthesia. Mildly affected dogs can be managed by limiting exercise, avoiding stress, and staying away from hot and humid conditions. Obesity can make the condition worse, somaintaining a healthy body weightis important. In dogs that have more difficulty breathing, surgery is recommended to fix some of the upper airway abnormalities. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), commonly called dry eye, occurs when a dog does not make enough tears. The lack of lubrication causes the surface of the eye and the inside of the eyelid to rub against each other, leading to inflammation. A thick mucus may also develop instead of normal tears. Most dogs with dry eye will have painful, red eyes, which leads to squinting or rubbing the eye. Ulcers on the cornea are common with dry eye and require immediate treatment. Dry eye is treated with topical eye medication. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a group of diseases that causes breakdown of the photoreceptor cells (rods and cones) on the retina, the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. Initially, the dog may have difficulty seeing in the dark, but over time complete blindness occurs. In most cases PRA is an inherited disease, and there are currently no effective treatments. Indogs with patellar luxation, the kneecap slips out of its proper groove. This causes discomfort and can lead toarthritis. Many dogs will skip or “bunny hop” on three legs when the kneecap is out of place. In some cases, the knee returns to proper alignment on its own. But sometimesjoint supplementsor anti-inflammatory medications are required. In severe cases, surgery may be needed. Dental diseaseis one of the most common conditions seen in dogs as they age, especially in small breeds such as the Pekingese. This occurs when bacterial tartar and plaque lead to inflammation of the tissues around the teeth—and, eventually, to tooth and bone decay. The best way to prevent dental disease is withdaily tooth brushingwith adog-specific toothpaste. Routine dental cleaningsare recommended to evaluate the mouth, remove plaque and tartar, polish teeth to prevent future buildup, and treat or extract teeth that are significantly unhealthy. As with humans, dental disease can be a painful condition and may even affect internal organ health. Feeding a commercial kibble or wet foodapproved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)is a good way to make sure your Pekingese receives a complete and balanced diet. Pekingese puppies should be fed afood formulated specifically for puppiesor designated for all life stages. For adult dogs, your veterinarian may recommend a dental-focused diet to help prevent dental disease. Adult Pekingese should be fed a measured amount twice a day. Pekingese puppies should be fed at leastthree meals a day on a consistent scheduleto prevent low blood sugar levels. Just like humans, the recommended caloric intake for a Pekingese varies among individuals; each dog’s size, metabolism, neuter status, and activity level all affect how much food they need. The best way to determine portions is to talk with your veterinarian, who can calculate caloric needs for your dog. Labels on dog food packaging also provide guidance. Pekingese may benefit from adding omega-3 fatty acids (DHA/EPA) into their diet. Omega-3 fatty acids can be found in skin and joint supplements, fish oil, and even in some specially formulated dog foods. These fatty acids act as natural anti-inflammatories that help support the skin, coat, kidneys, joints, and heart. The Pekingese is an affectionate companion that’s loyal to a select group of people. They are generally confident and opinionated, but a happy Pekingese is pretty laid-back at home. But because they’re so loving toward their family, somePekingese can develop separation anxietywhen their favorite humans aren’t around. Pekingese are alert dogs and have a strong bark for such a small pup. They might use this insistent bark when they think something is a threat—even if it’s just a neighbor grabbing their mail. Exposing a Pekingese to lots of new people, animals, and experiences from an early age can help reduce their tendency to bark at novel exposures. The Pekingese is asmart dog, which makes them very trainable. But how enthusiastic they are about following your signals can vary; they might just not see the point insitting on cue. These strong-willed dogs will learn best with training games and positive reinforcement. Obedience training Fetch Nose work Scent walks The Pekingese dog has a beautiful, thick, and shiny double coat that’s found in an array of colors: There are cream, fawn, red, gray, white, and black Pekingese, to name a few. Because the coat naturally grows long, frequent brushing is required from all pet parents, though some elect to trim their pup’s coat short for easier care. The Pekingese has facial folds around the eyes and mouth that require regular cleaning. Wiping with a moist washcloth ordog-specific wipehelps prevent skin-fold dermatitis (yeast and bacterial infections in the facial folds). Routine bathing is recommendedas needed to maintain healthy skin. Bathing your Pekingese more than twice a month, however, may strip their skin of healthy oils that act as a barrier against allergens. When you dogive your pup a bath, use a gentle,dog-specific shampoo. Brushing your Pekingese at least one hour each week will help remove tangles and knots from the dog’s long coat. If you run into pesky tangles, use adetangling and de-matting spray-on conditioner. Most Pekingese with a long coat require professional grooming every six to eight weeks. A Pekingese’s big eyes need a little extra attention. Wiping the eyes daily with a soft, moist cloth orface wipewill help remove any accumulated debris. Also, the hair around the dog’s eyes should be carefully trimmed to keep it from causing irritation. Because they don’t have a long nose to protect their eyes from injury, flat-faced dogs are at increased risk for ulcers and abrasions on the eyeball. If you notice your Pekingese squinting oremitting any eye discharge, a trip to the veterinarian is recommended. These can be signs of injury ormore serious eye conditions. Toprevent ear infections, pet parents shouldclean their Pekingese’s earsevery week or two with adog-specific ear cleaner. If redness, odor, or debris is noted, take your dog to the veterinarian. The Pekingese is a wonderful and loyal companion. The same characteristics that make them great pets may lead toexcessive barking, however, so early socialization and positive (and patient!) training are essential for Pekingese puppies. Pet parents need to know that grooming a Pekingese is no easy feat. To maintain their beautiful, shiny coat, frequent at-home brushing and trips to the groomer are necessary. The Pekingese lifespan is usually 12–14 years. Pekingese have been bred to serve as companions since ancient China, so they make wonderful family pets and often attach themselves to a select group of people. They are affectionate, if strong-willed. Pekingese were also historically used as watchdogs, so many continue to be vigilant and will bark to warn their family of anything they deem suspicious. Early exposure to different experiences and individuals may reduce barking in unfamiliar situations. Virginia LaMon graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians