SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/behavior/10-medications-dog-anxiety

Dogs can experience different types of anxiety or behavioral disorders, some of which can be truly debilitating, such as separation anxiety. As pet parents, we want to help but we’re often faced with many confusing treatment and medication options. Your veterinarian is the first stop for the best resources fortreating dog anxiety. Once your vet has given your dog a clean bill of health, they can start to make recommendations for your dog’s anxiety treatment. Treatment plans for dog anxiety often require the help of aveterinary behavioristor alicensed dog trainer. As part of a behavior modification plan your veterinarian may also recommend a medication for your dog’s anxiety. Below we’ll explain what dog anxiety medications are, how they work, and current dog anxiety medications available to discuss with your vet. No matter which medication your veterinarian chooses, you also need to put behavior-modification protocols in place to help your dog work through their anxiety. Anti-anxiety medication may help your dog feel calmer, while behavior modification techniques help to remodel the emotional response your dog has to anxiety-inducing triggers or events, helping them learn to be less afraid and more relaxed in general. Medication alone typically does not resolve anxiety in dogs, and this makes behavior modification necessary. Becauseanxiety in dogscan be displayed in a variety of ways, canine medications are available for both short-term and long-term use. Common behavior problems in dogs may include: Fear Stress Impulsivity (lack of control over impulses or emotions) Obsessive behaviors (repetitive behaviors like spinning or tail chasing) Aggression Panic disorders(not being able to escape the stimulus causing the panic) Noise phobias Aversions to a certain stimulus (wet grass) or an experience (grooming, a veterinary visit, a car ride) Regardless of the type of medication your dog is prescribed, there are no quick fixes when it comes to dog anxiety. Working with a certified behaviorist or trainer is the best way to help resolve your dog’s anxiety behavior. For conditions that require long-term medical treatment, dogs may need to be treated for four to six weeks before the effectiveness of the medication becomes fully evident, and treatment needs to continue for at least two months after a response is observed. Some dogs can eventually be weaned off their anti-anxiety medications as they learn through behavioral therapy to become less afraid and calmer, while others require long-term treatment. Some dogs that have anxiety or stress triggered in certain circumstances (such ascar rides, trips to the veterinarian, orthunderstorms) may benefit from the use of short-term medications that take effect quickly and only last for a short period of time. If your dog's sensitivity to triggers like car rides, vet visits, and thunderstorms is mild, talk to your vet about management and desensitization options you can try in addition to medications. Introducing atravel cratefor car rides, using a white noise machine during thunderstorms, or working on positive reinforcement training to counter-condition fear responses may help your dog. Dogs who are on medications for six months or longer should have yearly checkups andblood workdone, as well as periodic behavior re-evaluations to ensure their current treatment plan is still the best option for their needs. Currently Clomicalm, Reconcile, and Sileo are the only FDA-approved medications for use in dogs. The other available medications that your vet may recommend for your dog’s anxiety are all human medications, used off-label in dogs. The term off-label or extra-label use means that a medication can be used in a way or in a particular species that are not specified on the medication label. Off- or extra-label use of a medication can only be done by a veterinarian who has direct and personal knowledge of your dog and when there are no other appropriate medications for a particular dog's circumstances. These medications may not be available in the appropriate dosage strength for dogs, so they may need to becompounded by a specialty pharmacyinto a flavored chewable tablet, capsule, liquid, or transdermal medication. Compounded medications are also ideal for dogs who don’t enjoy taking capsules and need a different formulation of their medication. Here are the most commonly prescribed dog anxiety medications. Used in dogs for:phobias, fear, panic disorders Alprazolam is often prescribed to help dogs who become anxious during thunderstorms, but it can also be used for other types of situational anxiety such as road trips and vet office visits. Alprazolam is a member of the benzodiazepine class of sedatives, which work by depressing activity in certain parts of the central nervous system. This is a short-acting medication that takes effect quickly and can be used up to four times a day. Alprazolam is most effective when given at the earliest sign of anxiety, ideally 30 to 60 minutes before your pup is exposed to the trigger. If this medication is ever used long-term, it should not be stopped suddenly. Always work with your vet when weaning your dog off medication. Potential side effects may include: Lethargy Grogginess Loss of balance Increased appetite Used in dogs for:separation anxiety, reactivity, anxious aggression, or more generalized anxious tendencies Amitriptylineis a tricyclic antidepressant medication that works by increasing the levels of the nervous system chemical messengers serotonin and norepinephrine, which affect mood. It should not be given topets that have diabetesorepilepsy. This dog anxiety medication takes one to four weeks to take effect and is generally given twice daily. Amitriptylineis dispensed in tablets given with food. Dogs should be tapered off from amitriptyline if they have been on the medication for more than a week or two. Always work with your veterinarian when weaning your dog off a medication. Potential side effects may include: Constipation Lethargy Sedation Holding of urine Dilated pupils Used in dogs for:phobias, generalized anxiety Buspironeis a member of the azapirone class of anxiety-reducing medications. This medication requires continued use to be effective, so it’s not helpful for dogs that experience situational anxieties like thunderstorm phobias. It appears to work as a mild anti-anxiety medication because it activates serotonin and dopamine receptors within the brain. This medication takes up to six weeks to take effect and may need to be given two to three times a day. Buspironeis generally dispensed as tablets and given with or without food. Potential side effects may include: Loss of appetite Vomiting Used in dogs for:separation anxiety, repetitive disorders Clomipraminecan also be prescribed for dog anxiety. It’s available under the brand name Clomicalm, which is an FDA-approved treatment forseparation anxiety in dogs. It’s a tricyclic antidepressant medication that works by increasing the levels of the nervous system chemical messengers, serotonin and norepinephrine, which affect mood. Clomipraminecan take four to six weeks for a therapeutic effect to be seen, and up to two months is needed to determine whether it’s beneficial for a dog. Clomipramine for dogs is given once or twice daily and should not be stopped abruptly. Clomicalm can be given with or without food. Potential side effects may include: Drowsiness Vomiting Diarrhea Increased heart rate Dry mouth Decreased appetite Used in dogs for:situational anxiety, noise phobias, aversions Sileois the first FDA-approved medication to help dogs with fear and anxiety triggered by noise aversion. It’s an alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist that works by depressing activity in certain parts of the brain, resulting in reduced anxiety levels and relaxation. The drug works best when given 30–60 minutes before a triggering noise event or at the earliest sign that a dog is becoming anxious. Sileois dispensed in a multidose tube as a transmucosal gel. The medication shouldn’t be swallowed—instead, it’s absorbed in the mouth tissue when applied between the cheek and gums. Wear waterproof disposable gloves when handling the syringe and administering the medication. Potential side effects may include: Drowsiness Vomiting Weakness Loss of balance Sedation Head tremor Inappropriate urination Used in dogs for:situational anxiety, panic disorders, noise aversion, phobia Whenever possible,diazepamshould be given to dogs 30–60 minutes in advance of an event that’s known to cause anxiety. The drug can also be given at the earliest sign that a dog is becoming anxious, but it works best when given before an anxiety inducing event. It’s a member of the benzodiazepine class of sedatives, which work by depressing activity in certain parts of the central nervous system. Diazepam is a short-acting medication that takes effect quickly. If this medication is ever used long-term, it should not be stopped suddenly. Always work with your vet when weaning your dog off a medication. Potential side effects may include: Grogginess Sedation Loss of balance Increased appetite Agitation Aggression Used in dogs for:separation anxiety, fear, aggression, compulsive behaviors, impulsivity Fluoxetinemay also be recommended by your vet for dog anxiety. Reconcile, the brand version, is also FDA-approved for the treatment of separation anxiety in dogs. It can also be prescribed for other types of anxiety and behavior issues, such as abnormal repetitive behaviors, and even aggression. It’s commonly prescribed under the brand name Reconcile for dogs. Fluoxetineis a member of the selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of medications. SSRIs prevent receptors in the brain from removing the nervous system chemical messenger serotonin, which allows for higher serotonin levels in the brain. Serotonin helps with mood regulation. Higher serotonin levels can help to reduce anxiety, impulsivity, and aggression. Fluoxetine is given once a day and takes up to four to six weeks to take effect and demonstrate noticeable improvements in your dog. Potential side effects may include: Lethargy Decreased appetite Vomiting Muscle tremors Diarrhea Restlessness Excessive vocalization/whining Used in dogs for:situational anxiety, phobias, fear anxiety, panic disorders Lorazepamis a short-acting medication that takes effect in about 30 minutes. Whenever possible lorazepam should be given to dogs in advance of an event that is known to cause anxiety. The drug can also be given at the earliest sign that a dog is becoming anxious. This medication should not be stopped abruptly if you have been giving it to your dog long-term. This medication is classified as a benzodiazepine and works by promoting gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) activity in the brain. GABA inhibits the effects of excitatory nerve signals in the brain, resulting in a calming effect on your pet. Potential side effects may include: Grogginess Sedation Loss of balance Increased appetite Excitement Aggressive behavior Used in dogs for:generalized anxiety, anxious aggression and anxiety-related behaviors, fear of noises Paroxetine is a member of the selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of medications, which prevent receptors in the brain from removing the nervous system chemical messenger serotonin. This allows for higher serotonin levels in the brain. Paroxetine can take four to six weeks to take effect and should be given once daily. Do not abruptly stop giving this medication if your dog has been on it long-term. Always work with your vet when tapering your dog off a medication. Potential side effects may include: Constipation Loss of appetite Drooling Vomiting Diarrhea Agitation Sedation Lethargy Urine holding Used in dogs for:separation anxiety, anxiety disorders, impulsivity disorders, thunderstorm phobia, compulsive behaviors, fear-based aggression Sertralineis a member of the selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) class of medications. SSRIs prevent receptors in the brain from removing the nervous system chemical messenger serotonin, which allows for higher serotonin levels in the brain. Serotonin helps with mood regulation. Higher serotonin levels can help to reduce anxiety, impulsivity, and aggression. Sertraline, like other SSRIs, can take four to six weeks to take full effect and should be given daily. If you need to discontinue this medication and your dog has been on this medication for two months or longer, do not abruptly stop giving it. Always work with your vet when tapering your dog off a medication. Potential side effects may include: Lethargy Loss of appetite Vomiting Diarrhea Agitation Sedation Urine holding Depending on the severity and context of your dog's anxiety, your veterinarian may recommend over-the-counter options to ease your dog's nerves. Talk to your vet to see ifdog calming treats,pheromone diffusers, or compression garments likeThundershirtsare good options for your pet. Treating anxiety in dogs usually starts with a vet visit to discuss the concerns and rule out medical causes. Before starting medications, your vet may want you to work with a dog trainer or behaviorist. If medications are needed, your vet will help determine the right choice for your dog. Helping a dog with anxiety often starts by determining the trigger, such as any medical condition, pain, separation, or thunderstorms. Talk to your veterinarian about your pet’s anxiety to help determine the cause and how best to treat it. This may include working with a trainer or behaviorist, creating a safe space, increasing exercise, calming pheromones and supplements, and possibly medications. Your veterinarian may suggest working with a behaviorist or trainer to help your dog with their anxiety. Training to redirect their anxious behaviors and help them cope with their anxiety can dramatically reduce their stress. Benadryl is an antihistaminemost commonly used to treat environmental allergies or allergic reactions. Benadryl may have some mild sedative effects but they are not nearly as pronounced as in people. It is typically not veryhelpful for dogs with anxiety. Melatonin can be useful in helping some dogswith anxiety to relax. To determine the best treatment plan for your dog’s anxiety, consult with your veterinarian. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians