SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/pembroke-welsh-corgi

Istock/Ирина Мещерякова The Pembroke Welsh Corgi (also called the Pembroke or, simply, the Corgi for short) is one of the most popular dog breeds in the world. The Pembroke was initially bred to herd cattle and sheep in the U. as part of the carpeting, textile, and tapestry industry. One famous fan of the breed was Queen Elizabeth II, who surrounded herself with Pembroke Welsh Corgis since childhood. She gother first Corgi, Dookie, in 1933. The Corgi is a short, sturdy, muscular dog breed with a medium stature. The typical Corgi weight is around 30 pounds, and the dogs stand 10–12 inches tall. There are two Corgi types: the Pembroke Welsh Corgi and theCardigan Welsh Corgi. While very similar, a Pembroke Welsh Corgi tail is often docked (though this is a controversial practice that theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association opposes), while Cardigan Corgis have a long tail. The Pembroke Welsh Corgi is asmart dogwho enjoys human company. They’re loyal, spunky, independent, and highly adaptable—because of this, they can thrive in many different living spaces, fromurban apartmentsto rural acreage. The Corgi’s long body and short, stubby legs can be misleading, as they are powerful and hardworking herding dogs. Although low to the ground, they remain agile in their daily tasks and need regular exercise to be happy. Corgi dogs have a short coat made of two layers: a coarse topcoat and a soft, thick, waterproof undercoat. This double coat means that the Pembroke Welsh Corgi sheds a lot. Other than routine brushing to maintain coat health and decrease excessive shedding, the breed’s grooming needs are minimal. Corgi colors include red, sable, fawn, and black and tan. The average Pembroke Welsh Corgi lifespan is 12–13 years. The breed is prone to several health issues, so when you bring home a Corgi puppy, keeping up withroutine vet examsis important to address any health issues as soon as possible. Investing in pet insurancecan also help address common Corgi health problems. Pembroke Corgis can develop abnormal joints, primarily hips and elbows. Calledhip dysplasiaandelbow dysplasia, these conditions affect both the bones and the surrounding soft tissue, such as muscle and cartilage. This causes pain, lameness, and eventuallyarthritis. Treatment includes anti-inflammatory medication, joint supplements, and evensurgeryif the case is severe. Cataractscause cloudy eyes and interfere with vision. If you notice any whiteness on the surface of your dog’s eye or pupil or if your dog shows signs of vision loss, have your Corgi evaluated by your vet or a veterinary ophthalmologist as soon as possible. Patent ductus arteriosus(PDA) is a congenital heart condition in dogs, meaning it’s present at birth. A PDA occurs when an area of the heart doesn’t close as it’s supposed to when the Corgi puppy is born. This results in the puppy not getting enough oxygen in the blood. The left side of the heart enlarges, and this can lead tocongestive heart failure. Many affected Corgi puppies won’t show any clinical signs of PDA other than aheart murmurdetected by a vet. However, others may have symptoms that include: Coughing Trouble breathing Blue foot pads Collapse Lethargy Exercise intolerance A PDA in dogs requires surgery. Degenerative myelopathy (DM)is a slow, progressive deterioration of the spinal cord. This condition is caused by a gene mutation, and dogs are usually 8 years or older when symptoms begin. DM often starts with a nonpainful unsteady gait and weakness in the back legs, which progresses into paralysis. A DNA test is available to diagnose this neurological condition. Unfortunately, there’s no treatment that can help with this disease. Most dogs are euthanized 1–3 years after diagnosis because of a poor quality of life. Von Willebrand disease(vWD) is an inherited bleeding disorder caused by a deficient amount of von Willebrand factor (vWF), which helps blood clot. The most common clinical sign is bleeding: bleeding gums,nosebleeds, excess bruising on the skin, etc. A special screening test can detect vWD in dogs. Treatment might include a blood transfusion and special IV medications. Pembroke Welsh Corgis, like all dogs, thrive on a high-quality diet that meets theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials(AAFCO) nutritional guidelines. Pembrokes are prone to being overweight, so it’s important to keep an eye on how much food they eat. If your dog’s gaining excess weight, areduced-calorie dietwith minimal to no treats is recommended. Obesity in dogscan worsen many medical conditions, including joint dysplasia. If you’re worried about your dog’s weight, check with your veterinarian to see if you can give your dogfresh vegetablesandfruit. Pembroke Welsh Corgis under 1 year old need adiet formulated for puppies. After this, your Corgi should be switched tofood labeled for adult dogs. When your dog gets to be 7–8 years old, talk to your vet aboutswitching to a senior dietto meet specific needs at this age. These senior diets are often leaner and have added vitamins and supplements, such as glucosamine for joint health. Always make sure your chosen dog food meets the nutritional standards defined by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). In general, Corgi puppies need to eat three to four times per day and adult dogs should be fed twice daily. How much you feed your Corgidepends on the specific food your dog eats and your dog’s health, weight, and lifestyle. Ask your veterinarian for the best guidance on portions. In general, if dogs are on a well-balanced, AAFCO-compliant diet, they are getting all the necessary vitamins and minerals they need to grow and develop. Depending on their life stage, your Corgi might benefit from supplementation, including: Joint supplements:Glucosamine, chondroitin, and MSM supplements are great for promoting joint health. Essential fatty acids:Omega-3 fatty acids (high-qualityfish oil) are thought to have anti-inflammatory properties as well when given in appropriate doses. They are also known to help support eye and heart conditions. Probiotics:These are used to improve digestive health, strengthen a dog’s immunity, improve ability to fight disease, help with urinary tract infections, and reduce allergic reactions by decreasing the ability of allergens to absorb into the intestines/bloodstream. Nevergive your dog a supplementwithout speaking to your vet first. Pembroke Welsh Corgis are friendly and energetic dogs, with a large-dog mentality in a medium-sized body. They are eager to please everyone around them, so they enjoy training and learning new things. Bred as herding dogs, Corgis require significantmental stimulation, such as a job or an activity to engage their brain. Exercise and stimulation will also help decrease theirtendency to digandchewif they’re left alone too long or get bored. Most Pembroke Corgis do well with other pets in the house, and their playful nature makes them good pals for children. Corgis can have an instinct, thanks to their herding background, to try herding kids or small animals. It’s important to supervise allinteractions between kids and dogs. Despite their short stature, Corgis are athletic dogs who enjoy playing with other pups and people that can match their high energy level. Let them run around inside a fenced space,play fetch,and go onmultiple daily walks. Corgis also excel in herding andagility competitions. If you don’t live on a farm and have no animals for your Pembroke to herd, activities such asTreibball—a game where dogs learn to “herd” giant rubber balls—would be a great idea. Socializationandtrainingare important to curb herding behavior in Pembroke Welsh Corgi puppies. Training can also help reduce your Corgi’sbarking habits, which can be a bit excessive. Consistent training that focuses onpositive reinforcementand rewards will help Corgis master basic cues and learn new tasks. Their eager-to-please nature can make training easier than some other breeds, making Corgis agood dog for first-time pet parents. Obedience training Agility training Treibball Rally Tracking Herding Puzzle toys Hide and seek Fetch The Pembroke Welsh Corgi dog breed has a waterproof double coat that requires frequent grooming. Brushing once or twice a week with help remove loose hair and prevent some shedding, as Corgis tend to shed significantly. Corgis shed year-round, but more heavily during the spring and fall shedding seasons. Regular bathing, especially in the spring and summer, is essential to help with seasonal shedding. Mild, soap-free aloe or oatmeal-based shampoo is best for keeping the skin healthy and coat shiny. Daily brushingwith aslicker brushis important to maintain a healthy coat and strip the undercoat to help reduce shedding. Because some Pembroke Welsh Corgis have white or light-colored fur around the eyes, it’s a good practice to clean the eyes and surrounding areas daily to preventtear staining. Vet-recommended pet wipes, such asAngels’ Eyes,are available to clean around the eyes safely. A Corgi’s ears should be checked weekly forsigns of infection, such as redness, debris, and/or odor. Mild ear cleanersare great to use at that time to keep the ear canals clean and dry. You’ll need totrim your dog’s nailsevery four weeks or so. Whenever you hear their nails click against the floor when your Corgi walks by, it’s time to grab thenail clippers. Brush your dog’s teethevery day with adog-safe toothpaste. This is the best way to preventdental diseasein your Corgi. Othervet-recommended dental tools, like water additives and dental chews, can also help prevent dental problems in dogs. Pembroke Welsh Corgis can be excellent, loyal, and happy companions for the right household as long as their exercise, grooming, and training needs are met. A fenced yard would be a good idea for Corgis so they’re able to run out their energy, but they can thrive in almost any home environment due to their medium stature. Too much unreleased energy and a lack of training can lead to excessive barking and other behavior problems. Corgis also have a herding instinct, so without proper training, they might not be an ideal pet for homes with very small children. Obesity will shortenyour dog’s lifespan, so keep your Corgi lean and inproper body conditionby feeding them measured meals. Be mindful of how many treats your dog is eating, too. Yes, Pembroke Corgis can do well with kids and other pets in the family as long as they've been properly socialized from a young age. But because they are herding dogs and might try to round up kids, it’s important to teach your dog that children are not for herding. The average Pembroke Welsh Corgi lifespan is 12–13 years. Yes, Pembroke Welsh Corgis are smart and eager dogs that can learn new cues quickly. Though the Pembroke Welsh Corgi price varies, expect to pay anywhere from $500 to $4,000 or more. You can also find Pembroke Welsh Corgis for adoption from rescue groups. Pembroke Welsh Corgis and Cardigan Welsh Corgis were once considered the same breed but were eventually separated in 1934. The biggest differences between the two Corgi breeds are the ears and tail. The Pembroke’s ears are pointed and erect, while the Cardi’s are rounded. The Cardi’s tail is also much longer than the Pembroke’s. Corgis were originally bred in Wales to work on farms as herding dogs. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Barri Morrison was born and raised and currently resides in Ft. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians