SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/entlebucher-mountain-dog

Sarah Kloepple Adobe_stock/Alexander Entlebucher Mountain Dogs date back to the late 1800s in Switzerland. They were bred as cattle herders up high in the Swiss Alps, and often kept cattle safe on the rocky terrain as they trotted up or down. They are known for their tri-colored coat and larger-than-life personality. Amedium-sized dog, the Entlebucher is known as the smallest of the Swiss dog breeds, and can stand up to 21 inches tall and weigh up to 65 pounds. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are smart working dogs that need physical exercise andmental stimulationto be happy. They love to be involved in whatever their pet parents are doing and are deeply devoted to their family. However, thanks to their working history, this breed may need some time to warm up to strangers. Early socializationandpositive reinforcement–based trainingare a must for Entlebucher Mountain Dog puppies. The Entlebucher Mountain Dog lifespan is 11–13 years. They tend to be a healthy dog breed, but they can be predisposed to some common health issues. Pet insurance may be a good investmentfor a family looking to bring home an Entlebucher Mountain Dog puppy. Hip dysplasiais when the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, resulting in a loose joint. This can be influenced by growth rate, hormones, diet, and/or exercise. Hip dysplasia can cause degenerative joint disease andosteoarthritisto develop, leading to pain, limping, and difficulty standing. Keeping your dog at a healthy weightis important for preventing arthritis. Many vets recommend low-intensity exercise,omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil), and/orjoint supplementscontaining glucosamine and chondroitin for dogs diagnosed with hip dysplasia. In severe cases, your vet might need to performsurgery to correct the hip dysplasia. Patella luxationis when the kneecap slips out of place (luxates) to either side of the kneecap as a dog walks or runs. Mild cases may only be noticed by your veterinarian during a physical exam, while more severe cases are seen at home as a bunny-hopping gait,limping, and a bowlegged stance in your dog. Patella luxation is often addressed medically with joint supplements and weight management. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a term for a group of degenerative eye diseases that affect the layers of the eye responsible for vision. PRA is not curable, and eventually the condition results in blindness. But PRA isn’t a painful condition for dogs, and blind dogs can live long and happy lives with help from their pet parents. Talk to your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or eyesight, such as: Increased clumsiness (bumping into things) Reluctance to go outside at night Dilated pupils Cloudy eyes All dogs, including the Swiss Entlebucher Mountain Dog, need to eat a food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards. This ensures your dog receives acomplete and balanced dietthat’s appropriate for their life stage and size. Growing Entlebucher Mountain Dog puppies should be fed a standard puppy food until they reach maturity at approximately 12–16 months old. Feed your pup three or four meals a day on a consistent schedule. Once they reach their full adult size, slowly transition your Entlebucher to a high-quality adult diet. Working dogs or those with exceptionally high energy may benefit from a performance diet. Talk to your vet aboutchoosing the best dog foodfor your pet. Popular brands includeHill’s®,Royal Canin®, andPurina®. Feed your Entlebucher Mountain Dog twice a day on a regular schedule. Puppies may need to eat more frequently, up to four times every day. Talk to your veterinarian to see what they recommend for your specific dog. Some Entlebucher Mountain Dogs may be prone to eating too fast. For these dogs, consider aslow-feeder bowlorfood puzzleto help them slow down and prevent gastrointestinal upset. This will also provide much-needed mental stimulation. How much you feed an Entlebucher Mountain Dog depends on their life stage,body condition score, activity level, health, spay or neuter status, and the brand and type of food you’re offering. Talk to your vet for the best portion advice. Dogs eating an AAFCO-compliant diet typically receive all the nutrients they need. However, your vet may recommenda dog-friendly supplementto fill any nutritional gaps and help prevent or reduce the impact of certain health issues. For example, joint supplements may be recommended for Entlebucher Mountain Dogs with hip dysplasia or patellar luxation. Never give your dog a supplement without speaking with a vet first. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are loyal,smart dogswith a fun-loving personality—they’re even sometimes called the “laughing dogs” of the Swiss Alps. They are affectionate with their family, but they might need time to warm up to strangers. As with all dog breeds, early socialization is important. Entlebuchers can be good with children, cats, and other dogs as long as they are well socialized from puppyhood. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs need both physical and mental exercise to curb boredom and unwanted behaviors (such asdigging,chewing, andexcessive barking) and to channel their excess energy. They also love a challenge, like solving puzzles. As working dogs, they also enjoy keeping close to their families and following along with whatever they’re doing. But know that their innate herding tendencies may still result in their attempting to herd other small animals and children if this behavior is not redirected. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are eager to please and highly motivated, which can make training easy. They respond best to positive reinforcement. They can get bored easily, however, so it’s important to vary your training methods and keep your dog mentally stimulated. Hiking Walking Fetch Agility Puzzle toys Tracking/scent games Herding trials Field trials When it comes to grooming, Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are low-maintenance because their short hair doesn’t require frequent trimming or professional grooming. However, they shed regularly throughout the year and go through heavier shedding periods during the spring and fall. Considerbrushing your doga few times a week; not only will this help remove loose hair, but regular brushing also distributes skin oils and keeps their coat looking healthy. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs typically don’t require special skin care, and their coat provides natural protection for their skin. However, like all dogs, Entlebuchers can developskin infectionsand other issues. If you noticeexcessive licking, redness, swelling, or flaking skin, contact your veterinarian for an exam. While Entlebuchers don’t need as much grooming as other,fluffier dog breeds, they should be brushed regularly to remove loose hair and dirt. Brush your dog once a week or every two weeks; you can increase the frequency if your pup sheds a lot. Entlebuchers don’t need frequent baths, butbathe your dogas needed to keep them clean. Routine cleaning with a soft, damp cloth will help prevent normal tearing and debris from building up around your Entlebucher’s eyes. Contact a vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision, as these could be signs of PRA or another health condition. Routine cleaningwith aveterinary-approved ear cleanseris vital in maintaining your Entlebucher’s healthy ear canals. Be alert for signs of anear infection, and contact your vet if odor, redness, or discharge is noticed. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are a joy to have around; they are fun-loving, enthusiastic, playful, loyal companions. But because of their original purpose—herding and guiding cattle in the Swiss Alps—they are considered working dogs that love having a job. This means they have higher-than-average exercise needs (at least one hour of running, hiking, or biking) and plenty of mental stimulation. They will do best in a home with pet parents who can give them this time and attention. But they are highly motivated, ready to train, and friendly when socialized early. When well trained and socialized, Entlebuchers make great family pets that get along with other animals and children. No, Entlebucher Mountain Dogs are not usually frequent barkers. They alert when something is happening, but nuisance barking is unlikely to be a problem with this breed—unless they aren’t receiving the physical and mental exercise they need. Entlebucher Mountain Dogs andGreater Swiss Mountain Dogsshare a common ancestor, along with two other breeds: the Appenzeller and theBernese Mountain Dog. Though they share similar coloring, Greater Swiss Mountain Dogs are much larger (they can weigh up to 110 pounds). Entlebuchers are the smallest of the Swiss dog breeds, weighing 40–65 pounds. WRITTEN BY Sarah Kloepple Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians