SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/estrela-mountain-dog

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA thomaslenne/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images The Estrela Mountain Dog, or Cão de Serra da Estrela, is a Portuguesemastiff-type dogconsidered to be one of the oldest breeds originating from the Iberian Peninsula. 5–29 inches at the shoulder and a weight of 77–132 pounds, Estrela Mountain Dogs have long worked as brave guardians of flocks and families. But when off the clock, these dogs make highly affectionate companions—even with young children. As their name denotes, Estrela Mountain Dogs were built to work in rugged, mountainous terrain. Their coat, which comes in two varieties (long or short), is likened to goat hair and can be fawn, wolf gray, yellow, or brindle in color. Estrela Mountain Dogs also have a characteristic black mask, a hook at the end of their tail, and rose ears (meaning the ears rise slightly and then fold back instead of forward). If you’re wondering whether the Estrela Mountain Dog can trade work life for family pet life, the answer is yes. But that doesn’t mean they’ll shed their working dog instincts at the same time. Understanding these traits is key to providing your Estrela Mountain Dog with a home in which both people and pet thrive. For example, Estrela Mountain Dogs historically served as guardians. This history means the breed may be more reserved around strangers, and will needsocializationand training to be comfortable and well-mannered around new people. Thebreed standarddescribes the Estrela Mountain Dog as the “inseparable companion of the shepherd. ” These dogs love their families and being close to them. However, they also need a little room to roam. The ideal home would have a secure fenced yard for outdoor play and exploration. As with many dogs bred for outdoor work, their grooming needs are fairly minimal, but prospective pet parents should be prepared for some shedding. The Estrela Mountain Dog is agenerally healthy breedwith a life expectancy of 10–14 years. However, like all dogs, they are predisposed to certain health conditions. It’s important to work with an Estrela Mountain Dog breeder who prioritizes health over profit. Hip dysplasiais a condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, causing it to become loose. This can lead toarthritisif left untreated. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to navigate stairs, get up, or jump A bunny-hopping gait Pain Mild cases are treated with interventions such asweight loss,physical therapy,joint supplements, andanti-inflammatory medications, but severe cases may needcorrective surgery. Elbow dysplasiais similar to hip dysplasia, but here it’s the elbow joint that hasn’t developed correctly. It’s another cause of arthritis in dogs. Anti-inflammatory medication can help with pain and inflammation, but your vet may ultimately recommend surgery to treat this condition. Common signs of elbow dysplasia include: Limping, especially after exercise Reluctance or unwillingness to walk or exercise Stiffness in the elbow joint Grating or crackling sound when elbow joint is moved Bloat in dogsis when gas and/or food cause the stomach to expand. Sometimes, bloat progresses into a condition calledgastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV). This is when the dog’s stomach twists and cuts off blood flow to the stomach and spleen. GDV is painful and a life-threatening emergency, and it’s more common in large and deep-chested breeds. It’s important for pet parents to know the signs of bloat, including: Retching or dry heaving without vomiting Swollen abdomen Sudden anxiety, pacing, or inability to get comfortable Excessive panting and drooling Collapse If you notice any of these symptoms in your Estrela Mountain Dog, seek veterinary care immediately. Work with your veterinarian tochoose the best dog foodand feeding plan for your Estrela Mountain Dog. A vet can recommend a food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards and is nutritionally complete for your dog’s life stage (puppy, adult, or senior), size, lifestyle, and health. Your Estrela puppy will do best with alarge-breed puppy foodto support their fast growth. Because Estrela Mountain Dogs can develop bloat, pet parents should take precautions during mealtimes to reduce the chance of this life-threatening condition: Break up your dog’s meals instead of feeding them once a day. Most adult Estrela Mountain Dogs do well with two daily meals. Offer food to your dog in aslow-feeder bowl, snuffle mat, orpuzzle toyto reduce their speed when eating. Prevent your dog from exercising an hour before or after eating. Avoid using elevated food bowls. Your AAFCO-compliant dog food packaging will include guidance for how much to feed your dog based on their size. This is a great starting point, but the best advice comes from your vet, who will take into account your dog’s age, weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Be mindful of how manydog treatsyou share with your Estrela Mountain Dog. Treats should never make up more than 10% of a dog's daily calories. Your Estrela Mountain Dog will likely receive all the nutrients they need from their dog food. However, yourvet may recommend supplementsto address specific health conditions, such as hip or elbow dysplasia. Always talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new, including supplements, to your dog’s diet. While slow to warm to strangers, Estrela Mountain Dogs are devoted to their families. Their history makes them watchful working dogs, but they can be playful and loving with children. Estrela Mountain Dogs can even share a home with other pets, especially if they are well-socialized and raised alongside them. Like many dogs bred to make decisions in the field, Estrela Mountain Dogs have a definite independent streak. They aren’t particularly energetic, but they do need daily exercise to keep their brain and body healthy. Estrela Mountain Dogs are best for pet parents who have experience with independent working dogs. Thanks to their history as guardians, Estrelas arelikely to bark to alerttheir family at things they deem suspicious—even if that’s just your neighbors taking a walk. Consistent training canhelp keep barking to a minimum, but you shouldn’t expect an Estrela Mountain Dog to be quiet all the time. The dogs are more agile than they look, according to theEstrela Mountain Dog Association (EMDA), and might prove to be escape artists. Keep an eye on your dog whenever they’re outside, and make sure your fence is tall and secure. Bored, lonely Estrela Mountain Dogs are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors. Begin socializing your Estrela puppy as soon as they come home. Talk to your Estrela Mountain Dog breeder about how they approach socialization and ask your veterinarian about socialization activities that are safe for your pet’s age. Socialization helps dogs become confident, comfortable, and calm around strangers, new animals, and in new situations. Consistent training with positive reinforcementis equally important. Teaching yourdog basic obediencemakes them well-mannered in various situations. According to the EMDA, training an Estrela is a practice in patience, as the breed can be independent-minded and might not follow your cues as quickly as other breeds who are more eager to please. Walking Hiking Agility Rally Obedience training Skills training The Estrela Mountain Dog’s coat comes in two varieties: long and short. Longhaired Estrelas have a topcoat that’s straight or slightly wavy—and that’s shorter and denser on the limbs and head but longer and feathered on the tail, neck, and rear. Short-haired dogs have an evenly distributed coat with no feathering. Regardless of your Estrela’s coat type, you can generally expect moderate shedding. If your Estrela Mountain Dog spends a lot of time outdoors, regularlycheck for ticks, twigs, burrs, and other nuisances that can get caught in their fur and irritate their skin. The EMDA describes the Estrela Mountain Dog’s fur as having a texture not unlike goat hair. A once-a-week brushing with arake combshould keep their coat in check. Estrela Mountain Dogs aren’t prone to any eye conditions, but you should still watch for signs of disease, such asredness,cloudiness, ordischarge. Schedule a vet appointment if you have concerns about your dog’s eyes. Talk to your vet about anappropriate ear cleaning regimenfor your Estrela Mountain Dog. Watch for signs of infection, like redness and foul odor. Here are some questions to consider before adding an Estrela Mountain Dog to your family: Does my home have a fenced outdoor space that’s safe for a dog? Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with mental and physical exercise each day? Do I have the knowledge and skills to provide a dog with socialization and positive training? Can I remain patient when dealing with this breed’s independent spirit? Am I home enough to give a dog attention and close companionship every day? Am I financially prepared to provide regular veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 14 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent an Estrela Mountain Dog. While Estrela Mountain Dogs are famously loyal and loving toward their families, they typically need time to warm up to strangers and aren’t considered outgoing or friendly to everyone. The cost of an Estrela Mountain Dog puppy varies, but you can generally expect to pay at least $1,000. Yes, Estrela Mountain Dogs are veryrare in the United States. They are more common in their home country of Portugal, where you can still find them serving as working dogs. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians