SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/pharaoh-hound

The Pharaoh Hound is a unique dog breed with a regal appearance reminiscent of ancient Egypt. Elegant and graceful, this breed holds a mystic allure not only for the resemblance to the Egyptian god Anubis, but for the dogs’ unique ability to blush when excited. The Pharaoh Hound is believed to have roots dating back to 4400 BCE Egypt,according to the Pharaoh Hound Club of America (PHCA), before being further developed in Malta. The American Kennel Club (AKC) officially recognized the breed in 1983. Resembling other sight hounds with a slim build, the Pharaoh Hound is amedium-sized dogthat stands 21–25 inches tall and weighs 45–55 pounds. They have a statuesque presence that’s hard to overlook, with large ears, a slender muzzle, and long legs. Their coat is short and comes in shades of tan, chestnut, or golden-red. The Pharaoh Hound’s temperament is friendly and sociable, making themgreat family dogs. They’re playful and have an energetic nature that calls for regular exercise to keep them healthy and happy. Grooming them is relatively easy due to their short and smooth coat. Theaverage Pharaoh Hound lifespanis 12–14 years, about typical for medium dog breeds. They’re generally ahealthy breedbut may be predisposed to certain health issues. Pet insurance may be a good investmentwhen bringing home a Pharaoh Hound puppy. Elbow dysplasia and hip dysplasia are both orthopedic conditions that can affect Pharaoh Hounds. Hip dysplasiais a condition where the hip joint is unstable and loose, which can eventually causearthritisand limited mobility. Similarly,elbow dysplasiais a condition where a dog’s elbow joint doesn’t fit together properly. Both are inherited conditions that can also be exacerbated by other contributing factors, such as exercise habits, weight, and nutrition. Treatment for both can range from pain medications andjoint supplementsto surgery, depending on the severity. Pharaoh Hounds can developluxating patella, an inherited condition where one or both of the kneecaps (patellas) pop in and out of place (luxate). Although patellar luxation is not considered a painful condition, it may cause the dog to favor one leg and can also predispose them to other knee injuries (such as acranial cruciate ligament tear) and arthritis. Depending on the severity, surgical correction may be recommended to prevent further injury and improve quality of life. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a group of degenerative diseases that affect the retina (the light-sensitive layer of the eye), eventually causingblindness. Night blindness is often the first sign of the most common form of PRA. This will progress to a complete loss of vision. PRA is an inherited disease that affects Pharaoh Hounds as a result of both parents carrying the gene, even though the parents may not show signs of it themselves. While this disease cannot be prevented or treated, there is a DNA test that can screen for the defective gene in potential carriers. Ultimately, monitoring a Pharaoh Hound’s routine activities for changes and ensuring regular eye examinations by a veterinarian are best for early detection. This breed has an elevated risk forcertain types of cancer, includinghemangiosarcoma,mast cell tumors, andmammary cancer. These cancers affect different areas of the body, andregular health screeningsare important because early detection and treatment can significantly affect your pup’s prognosis. A balanced diet rich in proteins, healthy fats, and carbohydrates is essential for Pharaoh Hounds. A food that meets the standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)for the dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior) is best. It’s always recommended to consult with your veterinarian for specific dietary recommendations for your pet. Feeding an adult Pharaoh Hound two to three small meals a day is recommended to maintain their energy level. Pharaoh Hound puppies may requirethree to four small meals a day. Using aslow-feeder bowlcan promote better digestion and provide some enrichment during mealtime. Theamount of food to feed your Pharaoh Houndwill vary based on their age, size, activity level, and health. The packaging on your AAFCO-approved dog food will provide guidance on serving sizes. But for the best advice on how much to feed your Pharaoh Hound, talk to your veterinarian. While awell-balanced dietprovides all the nutrition a Pharaoh Hound needs, supplements likeomega-3 fatty acidscan support skin and coat health, and glucosamine can be beneficial for joint health. Consult with your veterinarian beforestarting your dog on any supplements. Pharaoh Hounds are good-natured, loving, and get along well with children. They’re extremely playful dogs that must have engaging activity every day, from informal backyard play toorganized dog sports. While they’re a good fit for active families, well-exercised Pharaoh Hounds are pretty laid-back at home. As sight hounds, Pharaoh Hounds have been bred to hunt based on sight. This means they have astrong prey driveand can be highly responsive to small, fast-moving objects or animals. For this reason, it’s important to keep them in a fenced yard or on a leash while outside to prevent them from chasing critters that may catch their attention. Thebreed club recommendsa 6-foot fence for Pharaoh Hounds. Pharaoh Hounds can also bevery vocal dogs, especially when excited or during play. Like many sight hounds, Pharaoh Hounds are bred to think and act independently, the breed club says. They require patience with training, though the breed is also intelligent and eager to please their people, which means they can pick up cues quickly withpositive reinforcement. Make sure training is done somewhere free of distractions. If you’re working on cues in your backyard, for example, your training session will be derailed by a passing squirrel. Agility Nose work Dock diving Frisbee® Hunting Thanks to their short, fine coat, Pharaoh Hounds are low-maintenance in terms of grooming. Skin care for the Pharaoh Hound can vary depending on the individual dog’s needs. However, the breed typically does not have sensitive skin. Regular checkups with your veterinarian can help ensure no skin issues are developing. Pharaoh Hounds do shed, but not as much as many other breeds. A weekly brushing is usually sufficient to remove dead hair and keep their coat looking sleek and shiny. This breed only needs a bath when they get dirty or smelly, which is rarely. Because Pharaoh Hounds are susceptible to PRA, pet parents must watch for any changes in their dog’s eyes or vision. If you notice anything likecloudiness,discharge, or if your dog seems to have trouble seeing (for example, if they’re bumping into things or seem to get lost at night), contact your veterinarian. Pharaoh Hounds may alsodevelop normal tear staining, which can be cleaned with aveterinary-approved wipe. Routine ear cleaningwith aveterinary-approved cleansercan helpprevent infections. Ask your vet how often you should clean your dog’s ears. Before bringing home a Pharaoh Hound, understanding their need for exercise, social interaction, and basic grooming is crucial. Ideal homes for a Pharaoh Hound have a spacious, securely fenced yard with an active and attentive family. They do well with children and other dogs, but homes with cats and other small animals may be tricky to manage due to their prey drive. Introductions to catsand pocket pets need to be done slowly and properly. Pharaoh Hounds don’t require much grooming, and they are considered to be a healthy breed. Yes, Pharaoh Hounds have a patient and gentle nature with children and other dogs, making them excellent family pets. The Pharaoh Hound price can range widely, but they are considered to be a more expensive breed due to their rarity. You can expect to pay anywhere between $1,500 and $2,500 for a Pharaoh Hound puppy. Pharaoh Hounds are sometimes confused withBasenjisorIbizan Hounds. The three ancient breeds share a similar sleek appearance, but they’re each different in size and origin: Pharaoh Houndsstand 21–25 inches tall, weigh 45–55 pounds, and originated in Egypt. Basenjisare just 16–17 inches tall, weigh up to 24 pounds, and are thought to have originated in Libya. Ibizan Houndsare the tallest, at nearly 28 inches in height. They also weigh 45–50 pounds and originated in Egypt. But while Pharaoh Hounds can have small white markings, Ibizan Hounds can be all-white or have large white markings on their red fur. Featured Image: Hanna Dymytrova-Kaihila/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Teresa Kho-Pelfrey graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2015 and completed her clinical year at Purdue. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians