SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/parasites/why-you-need-stay-current-flea-tick-and-heartworm-protection

All over the country, temps are on the rise, trees are starting to bud, and flowers are starting to bloom. While we may be practicing social distancing, bugs are still out there causing problems for our pets. But if you could protect yourself, your family and your pet from fleas, ticks, and heartworms by administering a monthly, quarterly, or even semi-annual dosage of a medication to your pet, why wouldnŌĆÖt you? Tropical species of mosquitos are now being found as far north as Minnesota and as far west as Nevada. Mosquitos can transmit heartworms to your pets. Lyme disease, a tickborne illness historically associated with the Northeast, has now been diagnosed in all 50 states. Additionally, there has been a5. 9% increase in cats in flea infestations reported by veterinarians in the last 10 years. So, what does this mean for our pets? Mosquitos are more than just pesky little bugs. In peak season, dogs can be bitten by as many as 500 mosquitos PER DAY. Over 70 species of mosquitos have been shown to be capable of transmitting dangerous heartworms to dogs and cats. According to the American Heartworm Society, only half the number of dogs that are pets and 5% of cats regularly receive heartworm preventative. Ticks that used to only be found along the Gulf Coast have traveled to the Central United States, and all their diseases have gone along for the ride. Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Lyme Disease, and Ehrlichiosis are being diagnosed all over the United States, both in animals and in people. Bartonellosis, or cat scratch disease, is on the rise as well. The causative agent, Bartonella henselae, is transmitted between cats by fleas and is likely to be terribly underdiagnosed due to emerging symptoms that were unknown until recently, as they are not listed among the ŌĆśclassicŌĆÖ symptoms of the disease. Fleas also carry tapeworms, which can cause severe gastrointestinal, as well as system-wide, problems in household pets. As cities expand and urban sprawl continues, residential buildings, shopping centers, and parking lots create ŌĆ£heat islandsŌĆØ that are capable of moderating temperatures throughout seasonal changes. This establishes microcosms that allow these parasites to survive. A mosquito larva can survive in any small puddle, even in a flowerpot! Mosquitos, fleas, and ticks can travel through doors and windows, and they can even hitch a ride on clothing to come into your home and infect your pet. This is why parasite prevention is ESSENTIAL for dogs and cats. No matter where you live and no matter your lifestyle, dogs and cats should be on heartworm, flea, and tick prevention year-round. Even if you have an inside-only cat or mini dog, they still need protection! ItŌĆÖs much better for your petsŌĆÖ health to be safe rather than sorry. Many preventatives on the market can treat a wide spectrum of parasites with a single treatment. Others focus on particular groups of parasites, which means they are usually prescribed together. For example, Trifexis┬« is used to prevent not only heartworms, but also intestinal parasites and fleas. Credelio┬« is used to prevent fleas and ticks, while Interceptor Plus is prescribed to prevent heartworms and intestinal parasites. Here are some effective preventatives: Combination Products:Trifexis┬«,Sentinel┬«,Revolution┬«,Revolution┬«PlusŌĆŗŌĆŗŌĆŗŌĆŗŌĆŗŌĆŗ,Bravecto┬«Plus,Simparica TRIO┬« Heartworm and Intestinal Parasite Products:Interceptor Plus┬«,Heartgard┬«,Tri-Heart┬«Plus,Iverhart┬«,Coraxis┬« Flea and Tick Products:Credelio┬«,Nexgard┬«,Bravecto┬«,Simparica┬«,Advantage┬«Multi,Comfortis┬« Ask your veterinarian today which product is the best fit for YOUR pet. com/dardespot WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Katy Nelson is the Senior Veterinary Relations Manager for Chewy Health, as well as an associate veterinarian at the Belle Haven Animal. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians