SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/shih-tzu

Istock/Drazen Zigic The Shih Tzu is a Tibetantoy breedborn to be a furry companion. This breeddates back centuries, though the dogs weren’t formally recognized by the American Kennel Club (AKC) until 1969. These little “lion dogs,” as their name means, were associated with Buddhism and bred to look like lions, according to theShih Tzu Club. Imperial rulers bred Shih Tzu dogs to alert their homes to visitors with a sharp bark. Eventually, this breed became a companion animal instead of a working guardian dog, as people in China began breeding them with breeds such asPugsandPekingese. Today’s Shih Tzu is an active andfriendly breedweighing anywhere between 9–16 pounds with an average height of 10 inches. Shih Tzu have long, smooth fur; a squished muzzle; a pronounced underbite, and short, floppy ears. Their heads are round with bulbous, expressive eyes. Shih Tzu are pleasant and energetic companions. They are generally happy and sociable with people and other animals of all ages, preferring to not spend their time alone. Like all dogs, Shih Tzupuppies should be socialized at a young ageto avoid any anxiety. Otherwise, they might display bad behaviors such asbarking excessivelyordigging in your back yard. All dogs, including the Shih Tzu, require exercise, but this breed is oftensatisfied with a 30-minute walkand at-home playtime. Because of their anatomy, it’s best touse a harnessinstead of clipping their leash to their collar. Most of a Shih Tzu dog’s upkeep deals with their long, luxurious double haircoat that grows continuously. They don’t shed much and are considered a“hypoallergenic” dog breed, though no dog breed is truly hypoallergenic. Their coat is alsoprone to tangling and matting. This coat is often shaved short into a "puppy cut” to avoid continuous grooming, and if left uncut, the fur can grow so long that it drags on the ground. If a Shih Tzu’s coat is kept longer, brushing andbathing will be a weekly chore, with professional grooming appointments sprinkled in every few weeks. Shih Tzu are small in size but have big personalities. They make loyal, loving companions for families with children and other animals. Shih Tzu are playful, smart, and want to please their pet parents. When socialized at a young age, this breed can be great with children and other animals as well. Just make sure yourkids know how to play gentlywith this small breed so no one is accidentally hurt. Playtime between kids and dogs should always be supervised. Shih Tzu dogs are quite adaptable and can range from a sedentary lifestyle cuddling indoors to a more adventurous walk in the park. No matter what you do, they just want to be with their people. They have a sweet disposition and need love and attention. Shih Tzu make wonderful companions due to their small stature, loyalty, and calm spirit. Shih Tzu love to be spoiled with attention and treats; they love to please their pet parents and are usually quick to learn new tricks to get the reward and praise they crave. Shih Tzu are people pleasers and are usually easy to train. They needhigh-reward treatsandpositive reinforcement when trainingfor the best results. Just make sure to count how many calories your pup is getting from treats—these can add up fast in a small breed like the Shih Tzu and lead to extra weight. The Shih Tzu temperament is influenced by their origins as “alert dogs,” and theywill still bark to alertthat someone or something new is coming into their environment all these centuries later. They can also be curious and dig if left unattended, so it’s important to monitor them closely in new or outdoor environments. Neighborhood walks Backyard or indoor playtime Learning tricks Cuddling with family Theaverage Shih Tzu lifespanis long, at 10–18 years. They are considered a healthy breed overall, though they can be prone to certain medical conditions. It’s important to know that Shih Tzu are brachycephalic, meaning they have a short, squished muzzle. This can put them at a higher risk for overheating orheatstroke, so they need tostay out of the hot summer weather. Some medical problems this breed is predisposed to include: Dogs with flat faces, such as the Shih Tzu, havebrachycephalic syndrome. This is characterized by upper airway abnormalities such as: Small nostrils A long, soft palate Collapsing trachea Extra tissue in the back of the throat All of these aspects can cause trouble breathing and make Shih Tzu more prone to overheating. If the condition is severe, your veterinarian may discuss surgery to help correct some of these issues when your Shih Tzu is a puppy before they have trouble breathing. Shih Tzu aren’t exactly athletes—and because of this, they can often become overweight. Obesity in dogscan lead to other issues such asdiabetes,arthritis,heart disease, anddifficulty breathing. It’s important to limit treats to less than 10% of a dog’s daily calorie intake and ensure your pup gets 20–30 minutes of controlled exercise (such as walks and playtime) daily. Patellar luxationis a condition where the kneecap slips out of its normal position, causing discomfort, limping, and arthritis. Dogs with luxating patellas will occasionally skip and hold up a back leg during walking. Often, the patella will return to its correct position on its own, but sometimes surgery is recommended in severe cases. Periodontal disease, or dental disease, is commonly seen in Shih Tzu dogs because their teeth can easily overcrowd their small mouths. This overcrowding leads to tartar and plaque development. Routine teeth brushing,professional dental cleanings, and surgical removal of any problematic teeth will help keep your Shih Tzu’s mouth healthy. Hip dysplasiaresults when the hip joints don’t develop properly. This eventually leads to arthritis, trouble walking, and pain. Hip dysplasia is often diagnosed viaX-raysand treated with medication orjoint supplementsto reduce inflammation and pain. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary. Shih Tzu have many inherited eye conditions, includingglaucoma,chronic dry eye, andcataracts. Eye conditions can be quite painful, and signs include: Red eyes Bulging eyes Eye discharge Rubbing the eyes Cloudy eyes Squinting Blindness Contact a veterinarian if you have any concerns about your dog’s eyes. Aliver shuntis a liver disease that causes toxins in the blood stream to bypass the liver, the organ that normally filters these toxins out of the body. The toxins build up, eventually causing chronic gastrointestinal issues, stunted growth, and even neurologic signs such asataxia (a “drunken sailor gait”)orseizures. Blood testingis performed to diagnose this condition, along with abdominal imaging and, often, surgery to repair the shunt, if possible. Diet changes and oral medications can also be used to manage dogs with milder signs. Shih Tzu ears are floppy, which presents two issues: It does not allow air flow into the ear canals It allows fur to grow inside of their ears This combination can trap moisture in the ears, leading to red, painful, and/or itchy ears. Your veterinarian will assess forear infectionsin your Shih Tzu with a thorough examination. Infections are often treated with topical and/or oral medications. Glomerulonephrititisis a type of kidney disease inherited in Shih Tzu. It causes excess protein to be lost from the body and may cause the kidneys to malfunction at an early age. Clinical signs can include: Lack of appetite Vomiting Diarrhea Increased thirstandurination Weight loss Muscle wasting Therapy with diet changes, oral medications, and sometimesfluid therapyis required for treatment. Shih Tzu are prone to obesity, so it’s important tofeed them a well-balanced dietand to avoid too many treats throughout the day. A twice-daily,balanced adult small-bite dietis recommended. Pet parents should also consider feeding their Shih Tzu dry kibble instead of canned food to lessen the risk of periodontal disease, as dry kibble is abrasive and can remove some plaque buildup. A dental-specific diet, likeHill’s Science Diet Oral Care, can also be beneficial. You can also findfood formulated specifically for adult Shih Tzu dogsandpuppies. Shih Tzupuppies need to eat frequent meals(about three or four every day) to avoid risks ofhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). High-fat, protein, and complex carbohydrate meals will lessen the risk of low blood sugar issues, andwell-formulated puppy small breed dietsusually contain all of these components. Slowlytransition your Shih Tzu puppy to an adult dog foodwhen they’re around 1 year old. Your veterinarian can help you figure outhow much to feed your dogto avoid weight gain. If your Shih Tzu is eating a dog food that meets theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFC)guidelines, they shouldn’t need any extra supplementation unless recommended by your veterinarian. Dog supplementsthat can support the health of this breed includeomega fatty acids, which are good for your Shih Tzu’s heart, brain, skin, and joints. Your vet may also recommenddental chewsto lessen the risk of periodontal disease. Shih Tzu are minimal shedders, but don’t confuse that with having minimal grooming needs. Their coat—which can be a variety of colors including black, white, and red—grows continuously and needs to be trimmed and brushed regularly. Because their coats grow long, making them prone to matting and skin irritation, Shih Tzudogs need a bathonce a week. Contact your veterinarian if you notice any changes in your dog’s skin, including redness, flakiness, or dryness. Along with bathing, Shih Tzu must bebrushed at least a few times each week, but preferably daily. Routine professional grooming should be part of your budget, to either maintain the long hair coat or to shave it into a cute Shih Tzu haircut periodically. A Shih Tzu needs the hair around their eyes trimmed or pulled up with a hair tie to avoid any eye irritation. Their big eyes can easily become inflamed if hair is allowed to rub against them. The Shih Tzu is a breed that can be prone totear stainingbecause of their flat face. Excessive tear production or blocked tear ducts lead to a buildup of a reddish-brown pigment at the inner corners of the eyes, often extending toward the muzzle. Keeping this area clean and dry is the best way to avoid staining. Use avet-recommended tear stain remover. If staining is excessive or if your dog’s eyes are red, swollen, or painful, contact your veterinarian. Shih Tzu dogs are prone to ear infections due to hair growing inside their ear canals. This hair holds onto moisture, which can cause inflammation and infection by bacteria, fungus, or both. Routine cleaningwith avet-approved ear cleanerwill help reduce the chances of ear infections. If excessive hair is noted inside the ear canals, your veterinarian or groomer may recommend removing it to avoid irritation. Shih Tzu dogs are prone to ear infections due to hair growing inside of their ear canals. This hair holds onto moisture, which can cause inflammation and infection by bacteria, fungus, or both. Routine cleaningwith avet-approved ear cleanerwill help reduce the chances of ear infections. If excessive hair is noted inside the ear canals, your veterinarian or groomer may recommend removing it to avoid irritation. It’s important to brush your Shih Tzu’s teeth every day with adog-safe toothpaste and brush. Keep up with regular veterinary appointments so your vet can monitor your dog’s mouth and recommendprofessional cleanings under anesthesiawhen necessary. Before bringing home a puppy, potential pet parents need to consider the Shih Tzu's characteristics and be prepared to meet those needs. Because of the average Shih Tzu temperament, these happy-go-lucky dogs are happy just to be near you. They don't require a ton of exercise (though, attention and playtime are musts!) and, with proper socialization, Shih Tzu dogs are good around new people, other animals, and in novel situations. But it is necessary for this breed to find a home where their pet parents are willing to perform routine grooming and help them stay at a healthy weight. Shih Tzu don’t shed much and are sometimes referred to as a “hypoallergenic” dog because they can be a good fit for some people with allergies. But no dog is 100% hypoallergenic, as skin, saliva, and urine still contain allergens. Potential pet parents should spend time with the breed to see how their allergies react before bringing home a Shih Tzu puppy. The dogs weigh between 9–16 pounds and stand about 10 inches tall. The typical Shih Tzu price ranges from $1,000–$3,000, depending on breeding lines. You may also find Shih Tzu and Shih Tzu mixes for adoption at local shelters and rescues. All dogs shed, and the Shih Tzu is no exception. However, they don’t shed much when compared to many other dog breeds. The average Shih Tzu lifespan is 10–18 years. Teacup Shih Tzus have been bred to be as small as possible, often without any consideration to their health. Do your researchbefore bringing home a “teacup” dog. Katie Grzyb received her Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Ross University in 2009. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians