SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/cocker-spaniel

Adobe_stock/otsphoto The Cocker Spaniel, also called the American Cocker Spaniel, is one of the world’s most-loved dog breeds because of their big, round eyes; long ears; sweet face; and playful personality. American Cocker Spaniels were bred to behunting dogsand have the size to keep up in the field, but they’re also small enough to travel well and cuddle on the couch. They makeexcellent companions for first-time pet parents, adults and children alike. The average Cocker Spaniel size is 13. 5 inches tall and 20–30 pounds, making them the smallest sporting spaniel in the American Kennel Club (AKC). They have characteristically long, furry ears and come in 15 different standard coat colors, including black, brown, black and white, red, and golden. There are two types of Cocker Spaniels: American Cocker Spaniels andEnglish Cocker Spaniels. The two dogs look very similar, but there are subtle differences between Cocker Spaniels and English Cocker Spaniels. Namely, American Cocker Spaniels are typically a little taller, have longer ears, and wear a thicker coat than English Cockers. Cocker Spaniel dogs were originally bred to hunt, but now they are most commonly found as companion pets thanks to theirfriendly personality. They have a well-balanced and strong body that allows them to be both sturdy and agile. The typical Cocker Spaniel lifespan is 10–14 years, so they’ll be a longtime companion. They are susceptible to a few health conditions, sopurchasing pet insurancemight be a good investment when bringing home a Cocker Spaniel puppy. A Cocker Spaniel’s famously lush ears can be prone to ear infections. This is because the ears’ floppy shape can trap moisture in the ear canals, making it easy for bacteria and/or yeast to thrive. Signs of an ear infection include: Redness Odor Itching or scratching at the ears Head tilt Discharge Shaking of the head Contact your vet right away if you notice any of these symptoms. Ear infections in dogscan be prevented withregular ear cleaning. Ask your vet how often you should clean your Cocker Spaniel’s ears, and always clean them after yourdog goes for a swimor takes a bath. It’s important to be proactive about managing your Cocker Spaniel’s ear health. Pyoderma, or skin infections, can occur when long hair coats are not routinely groomed or secondary toallergies. The long hair becomes tangled andforms tight mats, trapping moisture and bacteria that can cause an infection. Routinebrushing and grooming your dogcan help prevent this. Hip dysplasiais most common in large pups, butmedium-sized dogslike the Cocker Spaniel can develop it as well. The condition occurs when the hip joint doesn’t develop properly as a dog grows, leading to looseness and, if left untreated,arthritis. Hip dysplasia may be managed in Cocker Spaniels withweight management,joint supplements, andpain medication. However, if your dog’s condition is particularly severe,surgery may be needed. A common bleeding disorder,von Willebrand diseasemakes it difficult for affected dogs to form blood clots. Cocker Spaniels are one of the breeds that can develop vWD, and the condition can make injuries and surgeries dangerous for your dog. Talk to your vet if you notice any abnormal or prolonged bleeding in your dog, such asnosebleeds,blood in the urineorstool, or bleeding from the gums. The needs of the individual dog dictate the best diet for a Cocker Spaniel, but it’s always important to select a dog food with high-quality ingredients. Look for a food that meets the nutritional guidelines set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Your Cocker Spaniel’s veterinarian can make dietary recommendations based on your pup’s specific medical history. Royal Canin® makes dog food specifically formulated for Cocker Spaniels’ needs. Cocker Spaniels that serve exclusively as family pets caneasily become overweight. It’s important to maintainproper body conditioningand weight by avoiding overfeeding. Working Cocker Spaniels are more active but still need proper portions and food to prevent obesity. Most American Cocker Spaniels follow a standard feeding schedule like other adult dogs. Typically, giving your pup two meals, one in the morning and one in the evening, is best for this breed. Cocker Spaniel puppies can eat more frequently; three to four meals daily. Because Cocker Spaniels have long, lush coats, food can often get tangled in their hair as they eat. After meals, clean off any food from their fur to prevent matting. Always follow the feeding guide provided by your specific food brand to ensure that your dog is receiving the appropriate essential daily nutrients—you can often find this information on the bag. Talk to your vet for the best guidance onhow much to feed your dog. A veterinarian will consider your dog’s current weight, ideal weight, health, and lifestyle when making portion recommendations. Most healthy Cocker Spaniels receive all needed nutrients from their AAFCO-compliant dog food. For a working Cocker Spaniel that participates in sporting activities, it could be helpful to supplement them with glucosamine and chondroitin to help keep their joints healthy. Omega-3 supplements (fish oil) can also aid in protecting joint health and keep their skin and coat lush and soft. Always talk to your vet beforegiving your dog a supplement. While Cocker Spaniels are sporting dogs, they don’t require high levels of exercise to stave off excess energy. They typically enjoyplaying with toys, fetching a ball, orwalking with their family membersa few times a day as forms of exercise. At home, these sweet-tempered pups love being close to their people and makegreat family dogs. Cocker Spaniels offer a friendly personality, both with people and with other animals. They can begood apartment dogsthanks to their temperament, size, and manageable energy level. Cockers love to be close to their people, and they are known tofollow their pet parents around the house. Cocker Spaniels want to please their pet parents, meaning they’re often easily motivated by rewards of food and praise. Always usepositive reinforcement training methods, but make sure you don’t overfeed your pup treats. Treats should never be more than 10% of a dog’s daily diet. Startsocializationand training classes early so your Cocker Spaniel puppy learns good manners. This breed also enjoys performance activities, such as agility training. Agility Walking Fetching a ball or toy Field work Rally Obedience training Working astherapy dogs Learning tricks Playing with housemates (human or dog) Although Cocker Spaniel dogs can have coats in more than a dozen colors, the officialAmerican Spaniel Club saysthe breed is broken up into three varieties: Black Cocker Spaniels ASCOB Cocker Spaniels (meaning “every solid color other than black”) Particolor (tricolor, red and white, brown and white, and black and white Cocker Spaniels) Frequent and regular brushing is required to maintain a Cocker Spaniel’s fairly high-maintenance coat and help prevent matting. Regular brushing will also help manage shedding, which is a year-round affair for this breed thanks to their double coat. Cocker Spaniels also benefit from regular professional grooming. Skin care for the Cocker Spaniel varies depending on the individual’s needs. However, the breed does not typically have sensitive skin. Bathe your dog as needed using adog-specific shampoo. Never use human shampoo on your dog, as this can dry out the skin. Whenbathing your dog, it’s important to thoroughly rinse the hair, as soap residue on the skin can cause irritation. Dry the hair completely with a low-heat dryer to prevent moisture from lingering in the hair and skin. Residual moisture can lead to matting and skin infections. An American Cocker Spaniel’s long coat can be prone to matting, which can cause skin infections if not cared for properly. Frequent brushing (at least once a week) is important to prevent infections as well as excess shedding. Routine cleaning with a soft, damp cloth or dog-friendly eye wipe will helpprevent tear stainsfrom building up around your Cocker’s eyes. Because Cocker Spaniels are prone to ear infections, routine cleaning with aveterinary-approved ear cleanseris vital in maintaining healthy ear canals. This should also be done any time after an American Cocker Spaniel is in water, such as after a swim or a bath. Before bringing home a Cocker Spaniel puppy, the breed club recommends asking yourself a few questions about your lifestyle. Cockers are not a good fit for you if you don’t like any sort of exercise, if you’re not willing to keep up with grooming a few times a week, or if a dog following you around will drive you crazy. These spaniels are best for families that want constant companionship and walking buddies. Yes, the American Cocker Spaniel is generally a well-tempered and friendly dog, typically a good family pet that does well with people (and other pets) of all ages. Cocker Spaniel dogs are not considered to be hypoallergenic. In fact, there is really no such thing as ahypoallergenic dog. Yes, Cocker Spaniels shed year-round thanks to their double coat. Regular brushing can help reduce shedding. The cost of a Cocker Spaniel puppy varies on bloodlines, breeder, and where you live. The average Cocker Spaniel price can be anywhere from $1,500 to $3,000 or more. You can also find adoptable dogs throughCocker Spaniel rescues. The average Cocker Spaniel life expectancy is 10–14 years. American Cocker Spaniels come in many colors, including black, red, and brown. The most popular Cocker Spaniel coat color is buff, which is a light golden-orange color. While the two look quite similar, there are subtle differences between American Cocker Spaniels and English Cocker Spaniels, mainly in appearance. American Cocker Spaniels tend to be slightly larger and stand taller than the English breed. While both have the characteristic droopy ears and long coats, American Cocker Spaniels tend to have longer ears and a thicker coat than their English counterparts. Teresa Kho-Pelfrey graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2015 and completed her clinical year at Purdue. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians