SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/conditions/skin/can-dogs-be-allergic-grass

chendongshan/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  Grass allergies in dogs are common—your dog doesn’t even need to be on the grass to experience an allergic reaction. These allergies are more prevalent in the spring and fall, though they can occur at any time of year. They can affect your dog in varying degrees, causingitching,lickingand, in severe cases,hivesanddifficulty breathing. Your veterinarian can help you determine if your dog is allergic to grass, and if so, develop an appropriate treatment plan. Treatments won’t cure the grass allergies, but they may help alleviate the symptoms. Grass allergies in dogs are a type of environmental allergy (also called atopic dermatitis) caused by pollen from various grass species. Allergens(grass pollens) are absorbed by the skin and mucous membranes, causing an immune response. Grass pollens can be airborne, so your dog doesn’t have to be physically on the grass to be affected. Grass allergies can occur at any age, but most dogs start having allergies after they are about 1 year old due to prior exposure to the allergens. Grass allergies are generallyworse in the spring and fall seasons, when grass pollen is more prevalent due to the variation of seasonal species. However, they may be a problem for your dog all year long. Grass allergies are caused by common grass pollens from grasses such as Bermuda, fescue, alfalfa, or rye. Symptoms are like allergies caused by pollens from trees (cedar, pine, oak) and weeds (ragweed, pigweed). Dogs who enjoy rolling in the grasscan get symptoms from direct contact. If a dog walks through an area where pollen is present and the pollen encounters a pup’s mucous membranes (nose, eyes, mouth), skin, or feet, they may experience symptoms. Others may get symptoms from inhaling the pollenduring a walkor simply from being in an area where grass pollen is present—even indoors. Symptoms of grass allergies in dogs include: Redness of the skin (erythema) Itchiness of the skin Scratching, especially at the face, armpits, and sides of the body Licking or chewing, especially the feet Arash may also appear; but due to the haircoat on dogs, redness and a visible rash may be difficult to see A severe allergic reaction—known asanaphylaxis—is rare. Anaphylaxis in dogs can occur within five to 30 minutes of contact with the allergen. Symptoms of anaphylaxis in dogs may include: Severe hives Facial swelling(especially around the eyes and muzzle) Wheezing Difficulty breathing An increased respiratory rate Vomiting with bloodorwithout blood Diarrhea with bloodorwithout blood If you think your dog is experiencing anaphylaxis or see any of the above symptoms, seek veterinary care immediately. To diagnose grass allergies in dogs, your veterinarian will obtain a complete history regarding the symptoms present in your dog, including symptom duration, severity, seasonality, and treatment (if any). Next, your  vet will performa thorough examinationof your dog’s haircoat and skin. The following will help determine a diagnosis: The distribution ofhair loss Anylesions on the skinsuch as pimples, rashes, ordryor oily skin Redness (to indicate inflammation) Scratches or skin irritation Sometimes, symptomatic treatment can be initiated based on clinical symptoms without any testing needed, depending on the case. If topical or conservative treatments are not effective, further testing may be needed to rule out other causes. Your vet may be able to performserum blood testingfor grass allergies. However, the test that provides the most accurate result for allergies is called an intradermal skin test, which is performed bya veterinary dermatologist. The intradermal skin test is usually performedunder mild sedation. One side of the dog’s abdomen is shaved, and specific allergens are injected. The area is monitored for the presence of hives, indicating an allergic reaction to the specific allergen injected in that location. If the allergens are identified, treatment is designed specifically for each dog. The goal of treatment for grass allergies in dogs is to manage symptoms, because most grass allergies in dogs can’t be cured. Treatment is based on severity of symptoms. Consult with your veterinarian on the best treatment for your dog. Formoderate to severe symptoms, certain therapies may be recommended, such as: Allergy medication—Prescription medications that control itching, likeZenrelia, may be recommended by your vet. Zenrelia is a once-daily oral tablet that works fast to control allergic itching and inflammation in dogs over 12 months old. Your vet may also suggestCytopoint(an injectable given every four to eight weeks) for your dog. These are prescription medications, so your veterinarian will determine which is best for your dog. Short doses of corticosteroids—Medications such asprednisone, prednisolone, orTemaril-Pcontain steroids that may be used in cases of severe itch. These are by prescription only and typically should only be used short-term due to potential side effects of long-term administration. Immunotherapy or hyposensitization therapy—This type of therapy consists of “micro-dosing” the pet with the allergen to build up resistance over time. It can be used if the allergens have been identified by a blood or intradermal skin test. Ifsymptoms are mild, the following may be recommended: Bathing in a hypoallergenic or mild oatmeal-based pet shampoo—Consistent bathingwill help remove the allergens before they have time to be absorbed into the skin. This may help prevent or decrease the itching. There areseveral brands of oatmeal shampoosavailable without a prescription. Trying a medicated shampoo—Amedicated pet shampoois not typically sufficient for treating an active infection, but it can help prevent an infection by removing the allergens and reducing the amount of bacteria and yeast on the skin. Always talk to your vet about which medicated shampoo would be best for your dog. Cleanliness after spending time outdoors—Ensuring that your dog’s feet and body are cleaned off when coming inside helps prevent licking and chewing of feet, a symptom of itching. You can use mild soap and water, aloe pet wipes, or medicated wipes that contain an antimicrobial and antifungal ingredient. Antihistamines—Benadryl may be effectivefor watery eyes, runny nose, and sneezing, but it is usually not effective for allergic skin conditions (allergic dermatitis). Discuss dosage with your vet before giving your dog any medication, even over the counter (OTC) medications. Fatty acids—Omega-3 fatty acid supplementscan help decrease a pet’s skin inflammation and help with general itchiness. It’s important to determine—or at least narrow down—whichgrasses your dog is allergic toso that you can try to prevent symptoms. Dogs encounter all types of grasses, including those in yards, dog parks, or fields. It’s helpful to know which grasses are in your area, monitor symptom flare-ups, and avoid these areas when possible. Allergies can be managed and symptoms controlled, but you should not expect a 100% cure. If symptoms are reduced by 80% (less itching), treatment is considered successful. If your dog plays outdoors on grass, walks outdoors on grass, or simply lives near a grassy area and experiences symptoms of red, itchy skin or feet, or sneezing and runny eyes or nose, a grass allergy is likely. Your veterinarian can evaluate your dog’s skin and help determine if your dog has allergies. The vet may need to do further testing to determine a treatment plan. No, grass allergies cannot be cured, but symptoms can be controlled with proper treatment and management. No, airborne grass pollen can trigger symptoms even indoors. While Benadryl or other antihistamines may be used for grass allergies, often there are better options on the market with better efficacy for your pup. These may include prescription allergy medications such asZenreliaor Cytopoint. Talk to your vet about the best choice for your pet. Over the counter shampoos (mild oatmeal shampoos, moisturizing shampoo, or medicated shampoo) can be used, as well as medicated wipes (KetoHex wipesorMal-A-Ket wipes). Dogs with allergies can be safely bathed twice weekly without drying the skin. The shampoo needs to remain in contact with the skin for 10 minutes prior to rinsing. Ask your vet about the best shampoo for your dog’s specific needs. Mindy Joyner received her Bachelor of Science in Animal Science from North Carolina State University. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians