SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/parasites/do-ticks-jump

sanjagrujic/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  If you’ve ever found a tick on your dog, it’s natural to wonder how it got there. Did it jump? Fall from a tree? Crawl from somewhere else? Understanding how ticks actually spread can help you better protect both your pet and your household. The truth is that ticks can’t jump at all. Unlike fleas, which are able to spring long distances, a tick’s legs aren’t built for jumping even small distances. Ticks are, however, adept climbers and fast walkers. Ticks attach to our pets through a technique called questing, in which they stand on pieces of vegetation (like grass) and wave their front legs. When a potential host walks by, they simply grab on as the animal brushes the foliage. When a dog touches whatever the tick is perched on, the tick quickly grasps onto the dog and quickly moves through the fur, looking for an area where the skin is exposed. Once they find the spot, the tick bites the skin and, in the process, injects an anticoagulant into the dog to prevent the blood from clotting. A tick may remain in the same location on a dog for several days while feeding. Manydiseases transmit very quicklyafter the tick attaches, including: Lyme disease Rocky Mountain spotted fever Anaplasmosis Ehrlichiosis Babesiosis Hepatozoonosis Many of these diseases can also affect humans. For the health of you and your dog,it’s important toprevent ticks from attachingin the first place instead of simply relying onremoving ticks once they’re found. Luckily, no—ticks can’t jump onto humans, either. However, they can crawl onto us from our pups. When wepet our dogsorsnuggle up close in bed, a tick can simply walk off the dog and onto us. In fact, ticks sometimes prefer to feed on humans because we have less fur, making it easier to find a good place to rest and feed. The best way to stop ticks from attaching to your dog is to use avet-recommended flea and tick preventative. These come in many forms, including oral medication, topical solutions, andflea collars. Which option is best for your pup depends on many different factors. Your veterinarian can help you sort out the options. Popular and effective preventatives include: Simparica     Some tick-borne diseases, such asLyme disease, have a vaccine for dogs. But many others don’t, which makes preventing ticks even more important for the health of your pet. Talk to your vet about the best tick prevention methods for your dog. Because of the number of diseases transmitted by ticks and the potential for people to also be exposed to the parasite through our pups, take care to prevent these parasites from getting into your house. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Sandra Mitchell is a 1995 graduate of the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians