SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-raisins

Adobe_stock/Olha  Raisins are a harmless and healthy snack for people, but can dogs eat raisins, too? Unfortunately, they can’t. Raisins—along withgrapes—are toxic to dogs, and they can cause a lot of trouble. Do not give your dog raisins, raisin products, or foods with raisins (like bagels with raisins and raisin bread), and make sure your dog does not have access to them. It’s also important that all family members and visitors know that raisins are toxic to dogs and should never be given to your dog. Raisins and raisin products don’t provide any nutritional value that can’t be substituted with dog-safe fruits, such asapple slices, orstore-bought dog treats. Grape and raisin toxicity in dogs can cause serious kidney damage that can lead to acute (sudden)kidney failure, which can be fatal. The exact toxic substance in grapes and raisins is unknown, but it’s believed that it could be the inability of dogs to metabolize flavonoids, tannins, and monosaccharides from the grapes. Based on known cases of grape toxicity in dogs, even one or a few grapes or raisins can cause acute kidney failure, which can be fatal. Raisins are more toxic than grapes because the fruit is more concentrated when dried. Kidney failure is not seen in all dogs that eat raisins, and we don’t know why some dogs are affected while others are not. But regardless, raisins are bad for any dog to consume, and you don’t know how your dog will react. The onset of symptoms tends to occur between 12–24 hours after a dog eats raisins. Symptoms of raisin toxicity in dogs include: Vomitingand/ordiarrhea, often within a few hours of ingestion (you may see pieces of raisins in your dog’s stool or vomit) Increased urination(initial stages) Drinking a lot(initial stages) Decreased urination ornot urinating(sign of the kidneys shutting down) Loss of appetite Lethargy, weakness, or unusual quietness Dehydration(check by gently pulling up the skin at the back of your dog’s neck; if it doesn’t go back into place right away, your dog is dehydrated) Bad breath More severe signs may be seen around 24–48 hours after ingestion when acute kidney damage has already started. Symptoms of acute kidney injury include: Gastrointestinal upset Abdominal pain Excessive thirst Excessive urination Dehydration Ammonia odor in the breath Progressive lethargy  If your dog eats raisins, treat it as an emergency. Take your dog to your local veterinarian or pet emergency clinic for assistance. Call the clinic to let them know you are coming and that your dog ate raisins or may have eaten raisins. You can also call thePet Poison Helplineat 855-764-7661 on the way to the vet’s office. A consultation fee often applies. Do notmake your dog throw upif you have not been instructed to do so—and especially if you aren’t sure what your dog ate or if your dog is: Unconscious Having trouble breathing Showing signs of serious distress or shock Your dog may vomit on their own, but whether or not they do, you still need to take them to the vet immediately. The mainstay of treatment at the vet’s office starts with decontamination. Your veterinarian will try to induce vomiting to get the raisins out. Then they will giveactivated charcoalto help bind any leftover raisins in the stomach and absorb the toxin. Expect that your dog may need to be hospitalized for 48 hours so the vet can give intravenous fluid therapy and monitor your dog’s kidneys through bloodwork. It’s not entirely known why raisins are toxic to dogs. Currently, one theory is that this is caused by the presence of tartaric acid in the fruit (raisins contain varying concentrations of this based on their ripeness and maturity). If your dog eats any amount of raisin, see your vet right away. After a dog eats raisins, they may experience stomach upset within 12–24 hours. This can include vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, and lethargy. More severe signs may be seen around 24–48 hours after ingestion when acute kidney damage has already started. Symptoms of acute kidney injury include gastrointestinal upset, abdominal pain, and more (see above). The result is toxin build-up in the bloodstream, caused by lack of filtering by the kidneys. This can result in decreased urine output, which may indicate complete failure of the kidneys with a poor prognosis. Eating a piece of raisin bread may also contribute to potential toxicity for dogs. Processing the raisin—such as through baking, juicing, or pressing of the fruit—does not reduce the risk of ingestion. Any ingestion of a product containing raisins requires immediate treatment for the best possible outcome. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian After graduating with a degree in Veterinary Medicine from Tuskegee University, Dr. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians