SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/lowchen

Katrina Eresman volofin/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  With a German name that translates to “little lion” and a traditional haircut to match, the Löwchen is a stately little dog. At just 15 pounds, this breed is the epitome of asmall dogwith a big personality. They’re intelligent, silly, and bred to be an accommodating companion. “Whatever you’re doing, they’ll do,” says Jennifer Beban-Lawless, a Löwchen breeder since 2000 and the breeder, owner, and handler of the first-ever AKC Champion Löwchen. The history of Löwchens dates back to the Renaissance, during which they were kept in the ladies’ quarters, Beban-Lawless says. There, they served as an alert for intruders. Women also used them to keep warm by tucking their hands into the long hair of the breed’s lion haircut. “Historically, their job is to run around the castle, jump into your lap, cuddle with you,” says Jennie Chen, a board member of theLöwchen Club of America. Compared to many other pure breeds, the Löwchen dog price is often high. But given their good health and low veterinary bills, these dogs may be worth the investment. Although the Löwchen was bred tobark in alert, withearly obedience trainingthese dogs can learn to be well-behaved companions. They don’t jump up on people and are more reserved than many other small breeds. Training is one of the biggest tasks pet parents will face with Löwchens. Their coat is surprisingly easy to care for, and they are reliable eaters with no major health problems. These dogs need moderate exercise anddaily walks, but they’re happy to spend much of their time lying around with their family. “If you want to lie down on the couch, they'll do that,” says Chen. “If you want to get up and go, they'll do that as well. ”  The Löwchen breed has good health overall, with just a few genetic issues cropping up here and there. Pet parents should also look out for conditions common in smaller dogs, like patella (kneecap) issues. The average Löwchen lifespan is 13–15 years. Patellar luxationis defined by the knee joint slipping out of position. Joint issues such as this are common among small dogs like the Löwchen. Pet parents might notice their dog avoiding putting weight on one leg before going back to normal. Many cases of luxating patella are minor and can be treated with medication, weight loss,joint supplements, orphysical therapy. More severe cases may require surgery. Like a luxating patella,hip dysplasiais a joint issue sometimes seen in smaller dogs. In this case, the hip’s ball and socket joint doesn’t fit together correctly, causing friction and deterioration. This causes pain and discomfort, which often leads to limping, lameness, or a decreased range of motion. Without treatment, hip dysplasia can lead toarthritis. Surgery may be requiredfor severe cases, but many instances of hip dysplasia can be treated through means like weight management, medication, joint supplements, and physical therapy. Adog with cataractsexperiences a clouding in the lens of their eye, which can ultimately interfere with their eyesight. Many dogs live normally with small cataracts that don’t affect their ability to see. However, as the cataract grows, your vet may recommendcataract surgeryto restore your Löwchen’s vision. This painless genetic condition causes a gradual loss of eyesight, leading toblindnesswithin one or two years of symptoms. There is no treatment for progressive retinal atrophy, so Löwchen breeders should avoid breeding dogs with this condition. Like all breeds, Löwchen dogs need a diet appropriate for their age. Löwchen puppies should havepuppy foodbefore switching to anadult food formulated for small dogs. The dog food must meet the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Talk to your vet about choosing the best food for your Löwchen—they can give the best recommendations. When it comes to meals, most Löwchen are not fussy and will be happy with consistent meal times that suit your lifestyle. Pet parents can expect to feed adult dogs twice a day, and Löwchen puppies up to four times a day. Because Löwchens are not a very active dog, they can be prone toobesity. It’s important to maintain a strict measured diet for your dog to avoid excessive weight gain. Your vet is the best resource for learninghow much to feed your dog. You can also follow the instructions on the packaging of your AAFCO-compliant dog food. Healthy Löwchens shouldn’t need much in the way of supplemental nutrition as long as they’re eating an AAFCO-compliant diet. However, your vet may recommend certain dog supplements, such asDasuquin, to address your specific dog’s joint needs. Never give your dog a supplement without speaking with your vet first. If you’re looking for a laid-back dog breed, Löwchen dogs are a great choice. Although these dogs may bark to draw attention to new visitors, once they meet a person or animal, they relax into their friendly temperament. This amicable personality dates all the way back to the Löwchen’s early days as a chamber dog. “If you’re running around the castle, you’ve got to get along with pretty much everybody,” Chen says, noting that Löwchens do well with kids, groups of people, and other animals. The Löwchen is an easygoing breed. Although puppies can be hyper, adult Löwchen arecalm dogsthat are happy to lounge with their family. This, Beban-Lawless says, makes them great dogs for older pet parents. Löwchens need moderate exercise to stay fit and healthy, but they aren’t usually up for long hikes or big adventures. Pet parents should take their Löwchens for short walks at least twice daily. Löwchens are relatively relaxed dogs but will dutifully alert you to visitors. However, they will not run over and jump on anyone, Beban-Lawless says. A simple greeting will satisfy their curiosity. “They may start out a little aloof,” Beban-Lawless says, “but once you're in, you're in. ” To preventexcessive barking, it’s important to train Löwchen puppies at a young age usingpositive reinforcement. Like mostsmart dogs, Löwchens have a fun time with training activities—although they may be a bit strong-willed. Chen advises beginner dog trainers to be aware of their clever controlling tendencies. “If the dog seems to be doing something annoying, it's probably because they’re manipulating you,” Chen says. Although they may sometimes try to do things their way, Löwchens still love to please their pet parents. Pet parents should use positive reinforcement training, such asdog treatsand praises, to get the best results with their Löwchen. Grooming for Löwchens is relatively low-maintenance. Their nonshedding coats consist of a fluffy undercoat and a coarse guard coat, which adds length. And whileno dog breed is truly 100% hypoallergenic, Löwchens come close and may make a good choice for people with allergies. Löwchen coats come in every color, and the color of their coats changes from puppy age to adulthood. Beban-Lawless says it “takes approximately four years for the dog to get their proper coat and color. ” Brush a Löwchen’s coatonce or twice a week to avoid matting and skin irritation. Dogs that live in humid climates or have more active lifestyles will need brushing more frequently. Beban-Lawless recommends using a finishing spray, such as a leave-in conditioner, to make brushing easier and avoid pulling at the skin. Many Löwchen pet parents keep their dog’s hair trimmed in the traditional lion’s cut. This cut leaves the poms, the tail, and jacket of the dog (the head to the elbows and last ribs) uncut and unshaped, and shaves the rest. The lion cut gives the breed a distinctive style but may require professional grooming. Alternatively, pet parents can keep their Löwchen in a short-haired “puppy cut” that’s easier to maintain. In addition to regular brushing, Löwchens—especially those styled with long hair—should be bathed once a month or more often depending on their activity level. Ask your vethow often you should bathe your dog. Löwchens are susceptible to a few eye conditions, such as cataracts and progressive retinal atrophy. Pet parents should routinely check their dog’s eyes for symptoms such as redness, squinting, or clouding of the eyes. Schedule a vet exam if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes. Most Löwchens have long hair that covers their floppy ears, which can cause dirt and debris to get trapped in the ears. Check your dog’s ears routinely, and clean them with avet-recommended ear cleaner. Ask your vet how often you need toclean your dog’s ears. As sociable andfriendly dogs, Löwchens get along with almost all people and pets. These dogs are not at all hyper. Instead, they love to lie around with their family. Löwchens do well in smaller homes and with pet parents of all ages—particularly those with less-active lifestyles. Their great health and simple grooming needs make them relatively low-maintenance. However, you’ll need to take them for short walks twice a day to keep them healthy and make sure you’re not overfeeding them. Excessive activity, like long runs or hikes, may not be suitable for a little Löwchen. Löwchens stand 12–14 inches tall and weigh 15 pounds. Because they were bred to alert their pet parents to intruders or the arrival of visitors, the Löwchen breed tends to bark at noises, and unfamiliar people or pets. However, by starting training at an early age, Löwchens can learn to curb this habit. For the most part, the Löwchen dog is friendly, well-behaved, and requires routine grooming and daily exercise. “They get along with everything,” Beban-Lawless says. “They can be whatever you want them to be. ” WRITTEN BY Katrina Eresman Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians