SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/can-dogs-eat-grapes

Victoria Lynn Arnold Adobe_stock/evgeniarusinova/Adobe Stock NOTE: Always check with your veterinarian before giving your dog any new foods, especially “people foods. ” What might be OK for one dog might not be good for your dog, depending on multiple factors such as their age, health history, health conditions, and diet. Dogs on prescription diets should not be fed any food or treats outside the diet unless your veterinarian tells you it’s fine to do so. Humans eat grapes all the time with no problem, but can dogs eat grapes? You may be surprised to find out that grapes of all colors (purple, red, green, and white) can be toxic to dogs of all ages. So why are grapes bad for dogs, and is it an emergency if they eat one? Here’s everything you need to know about grape toxicity in dogs. There are two main reasons grapes are bad for dogs. Grapes contain toxic substances that can be poisonous to some dogs. The toxicity appears to be in both the flesh and skin of the grape. This means that peeled grapes can be just as toxic as those with skin on them. Raisins are technically more dangerous than grapes because the toxin is more concentrated in the dried version. Until recently, it hasn’t been entirely clear what the toxic compound is that makes grapes a possible danger for dogs, but research now suggeststartaric acid, a type of organic acid, is the likely culprit. Dogs have a limited ability to excrete organic acids, so they can build up in the body. This can lead tokidney failureand death in dogs who are affected. It’s important to note that not all dogs who eat grapes will be affected. Each dog may react differently to the toxin. It may be that some dogs are sensitive to the toxin while others are not, or it may be that some grapes have higher levels of the toxin than others. Typically, the smaller the dog, the smaller the amount of toxic food that is needed to cause harm. But because there are so many uncertainties, there’s no way to tell if your dog will be affected or to what degree. The bottom line is that you should avoid any potential threats to your dog’s well-being by not feeding them grapes at all. Assume there is no safe number of grapes to give your dog. If you also have cats in the house, keep in mind thatgrapes and raisins are toxic to catstoo. Because of their size and shape, grapes can also be achoking hazard, especially for smaller dogs. A whole grape can get stuck in a dog’s windpipe, blocking their airway and causing choking. Again, there’s no safe number of grapes to give your dog. If your dog eats any grapes, call a veterinarian immediately for advice. If your dog has eaten the grapes within the last few hours, the veterinarian can take steps to prevent some of the tartaric acid from being absorbed. Supportive care and monitoring may also be needed. Signs of grape toxicity in dogs can include: Vomitingand/ordiarrhea: This usually begins within the first few hours of ingesting the grapes or raisins. You may see pieces of them in your dog’s vomit. Increased urination: This happens during the initial stages of kidney failure. Drinking a lot: This also happens during the initial stages of kidney failure. Decreased urination or not urinating: This is a sign that their kidneys are shutting down. Loss of appetite Lethargy, weakness, or unusual quietness Dehydration: You can check this by gently pinching the skin at the back of your dog’s neck. If it doesn’t spring back into place right away, your dog may be dehydrated. Bad breath  Treatment depends on the severity of your dog’s condition and how long it’s been since they’ve eaten the grapes. Your veterinarian may try toinduce vomiting(do not do this yourself). After that, they may also useactivated charcoalto help absorb toxins and prevent them from damaging your dog’s kidneys. To treat kidney failure, vets will typically try to support kidney function and flush out the toxins by usingIV fluid therapy. They will also use medications to treat your dog’s symptoms, like anti-nausea medications and gastric protectants to prevent or treatstomach ulcers. Your dog will probably need to be hospitalized for at least 48 hours, so the vet can properly treat them and monitor their kidneys through bloodwork. If your dog was only mildly or moderately affected, they may end up with reduced kidney function but could still recover with the appropriate medical care. Dogs whose kidneys stop producing urine due to grape toxicity usually die or are euthanized. Even if your dog has only eaten one grape or raisin, immediately contact your veterinarian or thePet Poison Helplineat 855-764-7661 (a consultation fee applies). Typically, they will advise you to take your dog to the vet right away to be examined and treated. You may have seen advice online about inducing vomiting at home or using activated charcoal to bind toxins. Although these things can help, do not try them at home before speaking with your veterinarian. They may advise against it, and you’ll probably need to bring your dog into the vet’s office immediately anyway. Done incorrectly, these procedures can be very dangerous. If you’re not certain whether your dog ate any grapes, it’s still important to contact your veterinarian and watch for signs of grape toxicity within the first 24–48 hours. While grapes are off-limits, there are severalfruits your dog can eat, including: Bananas Blueberries Mangoes Oranges Watermelon You can also give your dogfruit and vegetable-flavored treats. Here are some pet-parent favorites: No, dogs can’t eat green grapes. All varieties of grapes and raisins can be toxic to dogs. No, dogs shouldn’t eat grape jelly or jam, as many types will still contain the toxins found in grapes. Jelly also contains too much sugar for dogs and may contain xylitol, which is toxic for dogs. Avocados, wild berries, and cherries are other fruits that have the potential for making dogs sick. Avocados are too high in fat; some types of wild berries can contain toxic compounds; and cherry stems, leaves, and pits (but not the cherry fruit itself) contain cyanide, which is toxic to dogs. WRITTEN BY Victoria Lynn Arnold Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians