SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/german-wirehaired-pointer

Zack Newman German Wirehaired Pointerstrace their ancestry to 1800s Germany. Breeders set out to create a dog that would thrive in various environments—from mountains to forests to open fields—and sniff out and point game, whether it be birds or foxes. The result was this medium-sized, bearded Germanhunting dog. Still used for hunting today, German Wirehaired Pointers have a scruffy double coat that keeps them warm in cold weather and protects them from the elements. The German name for the breed is theDeutsch Drahthaar Pointer. German Wirehaired Pointers are high-energy dogs that do best with a job and purpose in the family. While they don’t need to be hunters, they do need lots of exercise andmental stimulationto be happy. GWPs (as they’re often called) love to be outside in nature. If you live in the city or in the suburbs, take them on adaily long walkand for longerhikes on the weekends. The German Wirehaired Pointer Club of America (GWPCA) says these sporting dogs also thrive in organized competitions, such asagility, obedience, and hunting trials. As medium-sized dogs, German Wirehaired Pointer puppies grow to be 22–26 inches tall and weigh 50–70 pounds. German Wirehaired Pointers aregenerally healthy dogsthat live an average of 14–16 years—longer than the typicallifespan of a medium-sized dog. But like all dogs, GWPs can develop certain health conditions. Pet insurancemight be a good investment for your German Wirehaired Pointer puppy. Von Willebrand Disease (vWD)is a genetic blood disorder often seen in German Wirehaired Pointers. The condition prevents a dog’s blood from clotting, thanks to a deficiency in a protein called the von Willebrand factor. This makes bleeding in GWPs dangerous, and you should take your dog to the vet if you notice any unusual bruising,blood in their urine, bleeding from the gums, ornosebleeds. vWD can be detected through a blood test and, though there isn’t a cure, the condition can be managed; dogs with vWD can live long, happy lives. Just like in humans, a dog’s thyroid glands help turn food into energy. When a dog’s thyroid becomes underactive, it can lead toobesity,lethargy, and chronic skin andear infections. Hypothyroidismis diagnosed with a blood test. While there’s no cure, the condition can be managed with lifelong medication. Dogs receiving treatment for hypothyroidism can live long, relatively normal lives. Hip dysplasia in dogsis a condition where the hip joint doesn’t develop properly and becomes loose. Similarly,elbow dysplasiais when the elbow joint develops abnormally. Both conditions can lead to pain andarthritis. Hip and elbow dysplasia can be managed with medications,joint supplements, and weight management, though surgery might be required if the case is severe. Talk to your vet about which method is best for your dog. German Wirehaired Pointers should eat a food that meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)and is formulated for their current life stage. Talk to your veterinarian aboutwhat food is best for your dog. Adult German Wirehaired Pointers should be fed twice a day: at breakfast and dinner. German Wirehaired Pointerpuppies should be fed more often: three or four times per day on a regular schedule. Your dog food packaging will contain feeding guidelines for your dog based on their weight. This is a good place to start, but the best way toknow how much to feed your dogis by talking to your vet. Your veterinarian will give you portion guidance based on your dog’s health, weight, and lifestyle. As long as your dogeats a well-balanced dietapproved by the AAFCO, they won’t need supplements. Your vet may recommend supplements, however, based on the health needs of your dog. Never give a dog supplements before talking with a vet. German Wirehaired Pointers are ready for adventure thanks to their robust energy, strength, and intelligence. According to the GWPCA, giving this pup a job is a must—even if it’s just fetching your slippers in the morning. GWPs form a close bond to their family and do well withchildren who have been taught how to interact with animals. As with every breed, all interactions between dogs and kids should be supervised. However, because this dog has ahigh prey drivedue to their history as hunters, they might not live well with cats or other small animals. GWPs can be anxious, especially if they are away from their pet parent. German Wirehaired Pointers often want to be with their people constantly. Crate training themfrom an early age can helpdecrease separation anxiety, but your GWP should never be left alone for long periods. If you don’t like being outside, theGWPCA saysa German Wirehaired Pointer won’t be a good fit for you. Make sure you can meet the breed’s need for exercise and stimulation. If they grow bored,German Wirehaired Pointers will barkordig to occupy themselves. Because of their smarts and independent spirit in the field, German Wirehaired Pointers need patienttraining grounded in positive reinforcement. Forming aclose bond with your dogis key to training them, according to the breed club. Hunting Running Hiking Agility Obedience Fetch Nose work Puzzles These German hunting dogs need special care paid to their coat. But otherwise, GWPs are low- maintenance for grooming. Because German Wirehaired Pointers love spending so much time outside, keep them up to date onflea and tick prevention, and alwayscheck their skin for ticks. Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s skin, such as flakiness or redness. This could be indicative of a bigger problem. German Wirehaired Pointers have a double coat that helps keep them warm and protects them from hazards as they hunt. Their fur needs to be stripped (hairs are removed at the root by hand instead of clipped) twice a year. Pet parents can learn to do this on their own, but a specialized groomer can also do it for you. If a GWP’s coat isn’t stripped, it will lose its characteristic wiry texture. This breed rarely needs a bath, but when they do, theNational German Wirehaired Pointer Rescuerecommends using a shampoo made for wire-coated breeds to preserve the texture. A GWP’s eyes should be examined annually to check for any issues. Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision, such asdischarge,redness, orcloudiness. Regularly (once a month, or more frequently as instructed by your veterinarian)clean your dog’s earswith aveterinary-approved cleanerto stave off ear infections. Talk to your vet if you notice odor or debris coming from your pup’s ears, or if they’re scratching at their ears. The perfect home for a German Wirehaired Pointer is filled with people who love the outdoors (preferably hunting) and won’t be away from their dog for long stretches of time. GWPs need constant mental and physical stimulation to keep them—and you—happy. Expect to spend lots of time outdoors with your German Wirehaired Pointer at your side. According to the breed club, German Wirehaired Pointers are extremely devoted dogs that crave human companionship. They can makegreat family dogswhen trained and socialized from an early age. Bored German Wirehaired Pointers will bark to entertain themselves, so make sure your pup gets enough exercise, attention, and mental stimulation to keep them happy—and keep the barking to a minimum. Every dog is an individual, and it’s important toteach a GWP recallwhenever they’re off-leash. This breed has a strong prey drive, which means they’re inclined to chase smaller animals when given the chance. It’s always best to keep your German Wirehaired Pointer on a leash or in a fenced space. Featured Image: Getty/PavelRodimov WRITTEN BY Zack Newman Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians