SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/border-terrier

Zack Newman Border Terriers were developed to be working dogs,utilized by English and Scottish farmers and shepherds, that would also fit in well at home after the hunt. Tipping the scales at just 15 pounds, these small fellows might not be what you picture when you think of ahunting dog, but their drive and penchant for digging in pursuit of prey make them notable allies in the field. While the Border Terrier’s size makes them more manageable, pet parents need to dedicate time to meet their dog’s physical and mental needs. The terriers require robust exercise andmental stimulationas outlets for their boundless energy, and their wiry fur needs a professional groomer to keep it in top shape. Border Terriers aretypically healthy dogswithlong lifespansof 12–15 years. That said, they are prone to a few genetic conditions that can be painful and costly to address. Investing in pet insurancemight be a good choice when you bring home your Border Terrier puppy. Gallbladder mucoceleis when the gallbladder becomes distended due to excessive mucus accumulation. This can be caused by several conditions, including Cushing’s disease,hypothyroidism,inflammatory bowel disease,or from a diseased gall bladder causing a decrease in the flow of bile. GBM can sometimes be caught early with an ultrasound and remedied with a diet change. But the2022 health reportconducted by Border Terrier Health revealed that most signs of the illness are not shown until surgery is necessary. Cushing’s diseaseis an endocrine disorder that occurs when the adrenal gland secretes too much cortisol, a stress hormone. This condition typically affects older Border Terriers. Warning signs include increased thirst and appetite; hair loss; and skin infections. Without management, Cushing’s disease can cause other issues for dogs, including: Diabetes High blood pressure Bladder stones Blood clots Treatment can involve surgery, radiation, or medication, depending on the underlying cause. Most cases of Cushing's disease in dogs require daily lifelong medication. Canine Epileptoid Cramping Syndrome, or CECS, is a genetic disease that can cause cramps in a range of durations and frequencies, from seconds to up to 30 minutes. This is usually first seen in Border Terriers that are between 2–6 years old. Sometimes the condition can betreated with a grain-free diet, low-protein diet, or hypoallergenic diet. Always talk to your veterinarian before making changes to your dog’s diet. Border Terriers can developcataracts, a condition that clouds the eye lenses. Regular eye testing can help pet parents identify this problem early, and cataracts can be treated with surgery. Border Terriers benefit from a high-quality dog food that meets the standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Popular brands include Purina, Royal Canin, and Hill’s. Your vet can help youchoose the right dog foodfor your pup. Feed your Border Terrier two meals a day—one in the morning and one in the evening. Border Terrierpuppies should eat more frequentlyas they grow, about three or four times every day. Treats should not make up more than 10% of their daily calories. The exact amount of food you should give your Border Terrier depends on your specific dog’s health, weight, and lifestyle. The dog food packaging will provide recommended portions, but always talk to your veterinarian for personalized advice. Feeding your Border Terrier awell-balanceddiet will supply them with all the nutrients they need, but supplements to support their eyes and joints might be good additions. Talk to your vet aboutsupplements for your dog, and never give your dog a supplement without speaking to their vet first. According to theBorder Terrier Club of America (BTCA), bringing home a Border Terrier is like bringing home “a 2-year-old in a dog suit. ” Pet parents need to focus plenty of attention on them to shape their pups into well-behaved dogs. This breed can be single-minded when they spot a neighborhood rabbit, and their willful personality requires patient guidance. Well-socialized Border Terriers do well in a family with children and with other dogs. Living with cats might be tricky, they they may see them as something to chase. But Border Terriers can get along with feline family members whenintroductions are made properly. A bored Border means trouble, as they will find a way to keep themselves engaged—usually by destroying your couch ordigging up your yard. These dogs need a job to focus on, plus regular exercise and play to set them up for success. After they’ve worked out their energy, Border Terriers are cuddle bugs that love affection and curling up with you on the couch. Border Terriershave a reverberating barkand are known to be independent—with a penchant for getting in trouble if they are bored,especially through chewingand digging. They will often dig to free themselves from their fenced yards, so it’s important to supervise your Border whenever they’re outside. Like all dogs, Border Terriers learn best whentrained with positive reinforcement. Keep training sessions short and lessons fun to hold their interest, as these dogs can quickly grow bored and decide they’re done for the day. Playing fetch Digging Running agility courses Hiking Neighborhood walks The Border Terrier breed has a hard, wiry coat that requires special care from a professional dog groomer. Other than that, the dogs are typically low-maintenance when it comes to grooming. There are no specific skin care requirements for Border Terriers, but monitor your dog for any changes. Becauseskin infectionscan be an indicator of Cushing’s disease, talk to your vet if you notice redness; scaliness or flakiness; hair loss; or discharge. Border Terriers need to be handstripped twice a year,according to the BTCA. Handstripping is a process where a groomer removes the dog’s hair from the roots by hand, instead of clipping it. This allows a new coat of wiry hair to grow in. If the fur is clipped, the Border Terrier will lose that characteristic hard coat, as the new hair that grows in will be a softer texture. For routine upkeep, pet parents just need to brush their dog’s fur with a slicker brush as needed. However, it can be difficult to find a groomer who handstrips dogs, so many pet parents may choose to learn the grooming method and do it themselves. Stay alert for signs of cloudiness in your dog’s eyes or changes in your dog’s eyesight, which can indicate cataracts. The Border Terrier’s floppy ears mean they candevelop ear infectionsmore easily than dogs with pricked (upright) ears. Talk with your veterinarian about how often you shouldclean your dog’s earswith aveterinary-approved cleaner. This will help prevent infections. The perfect home for a Border Terrier is one equipped to have a high-energy andintelligent pupin the house. An active family, especially one that has a job in mind for their Border, would be a good fit. Regular training and exercise will keep your dog happy and stimulated. Border Terriers make excellent pets, especially for active families ready to give plenty of attention to their dog. There are grooming responsibilities for Borders, but they are not stringent or too time-consuming. Borders are relatively low-maintenance dogs. Border Terriers have a loud bark and may use it to alert their family, but they aren’t known to be overly talkative or yappy. As long as they get enough exercise and mental stimulation, Border Terriers love cuddling with their family members at the end of the day. If you don’t handstrip a Border Terrier, they will lose their characteristic hard, wiry coat texture and color. The fur that grows in will look—and feel—quite different. Featured Image: iStock/jarafoti WRITTEN BY Zack Newman Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians