SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/cardigan-welsh-corgi

Erica Vasquez Known for their laid-back demeanor, foxy faces, and long and bushy tails, the Cardigan Welsh Corgi—affectionately referred to as the Cardi or Cardigan—is a delightful dog breed. Corgis trace their origins back thousands of years to Wales, where the dogs worked as herders and vermin exterminators, according to theCardigan Welsh Corgi Club of America (CWCCA). Cardigan Welsh Corgis are one of two Corgi breeds, the other being thePembroke Welsh Corgi. The two were considered one breed until they were officially separated in 1934. Cardigan Welsh Corgis are medium-sized dogs, typically standing 10. 5 inches tall at the shoulder and weighing 25–38 pounds. They have various coat colors, from red to the popular blue-merle pattern. The Cardi’s delightful temperament, steadfast loyalty, sturdy build, and12-to-15-year lifespanmake them a popular choice among dog lovers. According to the CWCCA, one of the best features of Cardigan Welsh Corgis is their family-oriented personality. Intelligentand eager to please, Cardigans make great family dogs when given the proper training andsocialization. Along with a winning demeanor, Cardigans have other traits that make them stand out, such as their low, sturdy build; fluffy, foxlike tail; and large, upright ears. This adaptable breed is devoted to their family. They make especially excellent companions for families who can provide them with the attention, exercise (Cardis need a walk every day!), and grooming they need. Cardigan Welsh Corgis aregenerally healthy dogs, and with proper care they can live to be 16 or 17, according to the breed club. But, like many breeds, they are predisposed to several health issues. Pet insurancemight be a good investment for a family bringing home a Cardigan Welsh Corgi puppy. Though more common inlarge-breed dogs, Cardigan Welsh Corgis can develophip dysplasia. This is a hereditary condition in which the hip joint doesn’t develop properly and becomes loose, leading to pain andarthritis. Mild cases of hip dysplasia can be managed with weight loss, pain medication, andjoint supplements. Surgery may be recommended in severe cases. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)refers to a group of eye conditions that cause vision loss. In the initial stages of the disease, Cardigans may experience night blindness. As the condition advances, they will lose their vision completely. There is no treatment for PRA, but blind dogs can live long and fulfilling lives with some modifications. Degenerative myelopathyis a slow-onset destruction of the nerves in the spinal cord. This leads to a gradual onset of hind-limb paralysis and is primarily seen in elderly Cardis. Talk to your vet if you notice your dog struggling to get up, dragging their back paws, or stumbling while walking: All of these are signs of DM. Cardigans have long backs, predisposing them to spinal issues likeintervertebral disc disease (IVDD). IVDD is a neurological condition affecting the discs of the spinal column, which in turn affects the spinal cord. This causes pain, nerve damage, and mobility problems that can even lead to paralysis if not caught and treated early. Treatment for IVDD ranges from medical management to surgery, depending on the case’s severity. Choosing the right dog foodfor your Cardigan Welsh Corgi is essential to ensure their health and well-being. Look for dog foods that listhigh-quality protein sources, such as meat (chicken, beef, lamb, or fish), as the primary ingredient. TheAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)can provide more information that defines the ingredients used in pet food. As a pet parent, it's important to consult your veterinarian when choosing a diet for your pup. The feeding needs of your Cardigan Welsh Corgi vary based on factors such as age, activity level, and individual health. It's also essential to ensure the meals you are feeding your Cardigan are appropriately portioned so you avoid overfeeding. To prevent overfeeding, establish a consistent feeding schedule for your Cardigan, ensuring they eat at the same time every day. Adult Cardis should eat twice a day; Cardigan Welsh Corgipuppies need to eat more frequently, up to four times a day. How much you feed your Cardi varies from dog to dog. Your AAFCO-approved dog food will provide feeding guidelines on the packaging that you can follow. But for the best guidance, talk to your vet. Your veterinarian will give you feeding instructions that are tailor-made for your dog. Getting acquainted with your new Cardigan Welsh Corgi puppyandbuying supplies for your new best friendis exciting, and you need to choose the rightfood and water bowls. Purchase easy-to-clean stainless steel or ceramic bowls, which are most suitable for Cardigan Welsh Corgis. Avoiding plastic bowls is a good idea for any pet, as the material (combined with saliva) can irritate the skin on your pup’s chin while eating. A well-balanced, AAFCO-approved dog food should provide all of the necessary nutrients for your Cardigan, but somesupplements may benefit their overall healthunder certain circumstances. Like any other breed, discuss supplements such asomega-3 fatty acids,probiotics, glucosamine, and chondroitin with your veterinarian to ensure they are suitable for your Cardigan Welsh Corgi. Cardigan Welsh Corgi Personality and Temperament [H3] Cardigans are generally friendly and affectionate dogs, forming strong bonds with their families. They are highly intelligent and eager to learn, making them responsive to training. With a moderate energy level, they require daily exercise, like a 20–30-minute walk, but nothing too strenuous. Cardis can be a good fit for first-time pet parents. Cardigan Welsh Corgis are adaptable,according to the CWCCA, and can happily live on country acreage, city apartments, or anywhere in between. They can also live well with other pets and children, especially when raised with them and properly socialized. Due to their herding background, Cardigans may exhibit herding behaviors, such as attempting to round up young children or other pets. Pet parents can help curb this behavior by providing their Cardi with ample mental stimulation through training andpuzzle toys, and by teaching them that some things (like children and the family cat) are not appropriate to herd. Cardigans are alert dogs, and theytend to barkat perceived environmental threats or changes. They can also be prone to anxiety, mainly whenleft alone for extended periods. The key to a happy Cardigan Welsh Corgi is a combination of physical exercise and mental stimulation—and training is a good mix of both. Cardigans are highly intelligent and eager to please, which makes them quick learners. They respond well topositive reinforcement training methodsand thrive with various mentally stimulating activities. Cardigans are a naturally curious breed. Their curiosity can be harnessed during training, allowing them to engage their inquisitive nature as they learn new cues and tricks. Obedience training Agility courses Fetch Hiking Swimming Herding trials Daily walks Interactive toys Tug of war Hide and seek Cardigan Welsh Corgis have a double coat that sheds, but regular brushing and basic grooming care can help keep their coat in good condition—and minimize shedding around the home. Cardigan Welsh Corgis don't have specific skincare needs unique to their breed, but pet parents should be attentive to their dog's skin and coat health. This means regular grooming, and promptly addressing skin issues to ensure they always have healthy and comfortable skin. Regular brushing can help maintain aCardigan's coat healthand appearance, prevent matting, and ensure they are comfortable and happy. Cardigans can benefit from regular eye care to ensure their health and comfort. Some Corgis may beprone to tear stains, resulting in reddish-brown discoloration around the eyes. Pet parents should regularly inspect their Corgi's eyes for signs of irritation,redness,discharge, or foreign objects. This will help ensure their eyes stay clean and clear of allergies. Routine ear care, like regular inspection andcleaning, is essential for Cardigan Welsh Corgis. Ithelps prevent ear infectionsand keeps their ears clean and healthy. As a pet parent, if you want to bring a Cardigan Welsh Corgi into your home, you'll need to prepare to provide an ideal home for them. A perfect home for a Cardigan provides ample love, attention, and mental stimulation, as they are intelligent and thrive on companionship. Cardigans are well-suited for families, singles, or seniors. Keep in mind this breed must receive daily exercise and playtime. Pembroke Welsh Corgis often have shorter tails or may be born without tails, while Cardigan Welsh Corgis have long, bushy, foxlike tails. Their ear shapes are also different; Pembroke Welsh Corgis have small pointed ears, and Cardigans sport larger rounded ones. The coat colors vary in both breeds, but Cardigans can come with blue and brindle merle coats, which is less common in Pembrokes. At 25–38 pounds, Cardigans are also larger than Pembrokes, which don’t exceed weights of 30 pounds. Cardigan Welsh Corgis are considered a less common breed than other popular dog breeds. While they are not as familiar as their close relatives, the Pembroke Welsh Corgis, they are not extremely rare either. Featured Image: Getty/bruev WRITTEN BY Erica Vasquez Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians