SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/pomeranian

Ruta Lipskija/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images Pomeranians are a miniaturized descendant of the Spitz sled dog breeds—theAkita,Alaskan Malamute,Chow Chow, andSamoyed, just to name a few. Originally, Poms were much larger (about 30 pounds, according to theAmerican Pomeranian Club) and were used for herding. However, they were bred to reduce their size to what we recognize now, and today the Pomeranian is one of thesmallest dog breeds, at just 6–7 inches tall at the shoulder and 3–7 pounds. Pomeranian colors vary greatly; there are tri-colored, sable, brindle, merle, white, and black Pomeranians, among many other colors and patterns. They have a foxlike face, thick scruff around the neck, a square body, and a fluffy double coat. Pomeranians have large personalities in their tiny bodies. They are sassy, spunky, and often have the confidence of a much larger dog. Pomeranian dogs generally do well with other pets and love attention. Poms are great companions for many types of pet parents—families, singles, and older adults included. They may not be the best option in homes with young children, however, because the dogs' small size makes them rather fragile. While the breed can be playful, the dogs don’t require extensive outdoor activity because of their small size. But thedogs’ extremely fluffy coatrequires daily upkeep and grooming to stay pretty and healthy. To make brushing easier, you can give your Pomeranian haircuts to keep their fur short. The average Pomeranian lifespan is 12–16 years, making them one of thelongest-living dog breeds. But it’s still possible for them to develop health conditions over the course of their life. When considering bringing home a Pomeranian puppy or dog, it may be beneficial toconsider health insuranceand budgeting for any medical issues that may arise. Pomeranians can develop symmetrical hair loss on their trunk, thighs, and other parts of their body (alopecia-x). Their skin can also become dark (hyperpigmentation) but doesn’t usually become itchy. The cause of this cosmetic condition isn’t fully understood, and it’s important to take your Pomeranian to the vet to rule out other health problems, including hormonal issues likeCushing’s diseaseorhypothyroidism. No treatment is guaranteed to be successful, but neutering,melatonin, and other medications may be helpful in some cases. Hypoglycemia in dogsis a sudden drop in blood sugar. This condition can affect small breeds and puppies under 3 months of age who don't eat frequently enough. But other causes, such as liver disease and some types of cancer, can also be to blame. Signs of low blood sugar include: Weakness Lack of appetite Stumbling Shaking Twitching muscles Seizures If your Pomeranian experiences an episode of hypoglycemia, contact your veterinarian and seek treatment immediately. Your veterinarian can identify the cause and work with you to find the right treatment, food, or feeding schedule. Pomeranians can develop severalcanine eye conditions, including: Tear duct issues:Tear duct issues can be caused by infection, genetics, inflammation, or other issues that can contribute totear stains—dark or reddish marks that appear beneath the eyes. Cataracts:Cataracts in dogsare often progressive and, over time, can lead toblindness. Pomeranians can have a genetic predisposition for cataract development, or it can be secondary todiabetes mellitus. Treatment is possible through surgery. Distichiasis:This condition is when the eyelashes grow abnormally inward, toward the eye. This causes irritation and can even causeeye ulcers. Contact your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes, includingcloudiness,redness,discharge, or changes in your Pomeranian’s vision. Collapsing tracheais a condition that typically presents as a goose honk-like cough. It most often occurs in small dogs. Your dog’s trachea, or windpipe, connects the mouth and nose to the lungs. A tracheal collapse occurs when the small, partial rings of cartilage that maintain the tubelike shape of the trachea become too flexible, or when the muscle that connects the edges of the rings is too floppy. When a dog with tracheal collapse pulls air into their airway, the trachea narrows or completely closes and it’s difficult to get air into the lungs. Treatment can include management through medication, or in some cases, surgery. If your Pomeranian is diagnosed with tracheal collapse, it’s recommended to use adog harnessinstead of a collar when going outside because pressure on the dog's neck can make coughing worse. Try to avoid situations that cause your dog to become overexcited, and avoid exposing your dog to irritants, such astobacco smoke. While all dogs can developdental disease, small breeds like the Pomeranian are especially susceptible to the condition. A smaller mouth means more potential for teeth becoming overcrowded or growing in at odd angles. This can lead to increased amounts of trapped food, which leads to tartar buildup. The best treatment for dental disease is proactive prevention: Brush your dog’s teethevery day, using avet-recommended toothbrush and toothpaste. Keep up with professional dental cleanings as your veterinarian recommends them. Give your Pomeraniandental chewsto promote good hygiene. Hip dysplasiais a developmental disorder that causes the hip joint(s) to become loose and unstable. Without treatment, hip dysplasia can cause significant pain and lead toarthritis. Many cases of hip dysplasia can be managed withmedicationsorjoint supplements. Severe cases may require surgery. Legg-Calve-Perthes diseaseis a condition that affects the head of the femur and the hip joint. The femoral head experiences a loss of blood supply, which causes it to degenerate and eventually leads to necrosis. The condition is thought to be hereditary in Pomeranians and typically occurs in young dogs. The most common symptom is the slow progression of lameness in the hind limb, and treatment often requires surgery. Patellar luxationis a condition where the kneecap (patella) shifts sideways away from its normal position at the front of the knee. In small dogs, this is typically a hereditary condition, but in some cases it can be caused by trauma. Signs of patellar luxation can include: Intermittent skipping or limping Bowlegged or knock-kneed stance in hind limbs Hunched lower back Medical treatment for a luxating patella can involveanti-inflammatory medication,weight loss, and temporary exercise restrictions. Surgery may be necessary in more severe cases. Because Pomeranians are at higher than average risk of hypoglycemia, it’s important that they are fed ahigh-quality dog food. A food compliant withAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards is a good place to start to ensure your Pomeranian is getting all the nutrients they need. Talk to your veterinarian to find thebest dog food, and always feed your Pomeranian a food formulated for their current life stage:puppy foodfor Pomeranian puppies, adult food for those at least 1 year old, andsenior food for older dogs. There are even breed-specific foods you can feed your Pomeranian. Pomeranian puppies should be fed frequently, with multiple mealtimes a day due to their high metabolism, their lack of fat stores, and high risk of hypoglycemia. Adult and senior Pomeranians should be fed two to three times a day to continue to prevent the risk of hypoglycemia. Senior Pomeranians may benefit from a diet with extra antioxidants, which can help prevent free-radical damage and help slow down some effects of aging, such ascognitive decline. The exact number of calories your Pomeranian may need depends on several factors, including: Lifestyle and energy level Current and ideal weight Age Medical history To figure outhow much food to feed your Pomeranian, consult your veterinarian as well as the feeding recommendations on the bag of dog food. Remember to factor treats, chews, and food toppers into your dog’s total calorie count, too, to avoid overfeeding andobesity. Because Pomeranians can have skin, eye, and joint issues, it may be helpful to talk to your veterinarian about adding adog-friendly supplementto their diet. Your vet may recommend giving your dog omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil) and/or joint supplements such as chondroitin and glucosamine. Never give your dog a supplement without talking to your vet first. Pomeranians are intelligent dogswith large personalities. Their intelligence means they enjoy learning and do well with training andmentally stimulating activities for dogs. But Pomeranians like their independence, and because of this, they prefer to walk on the ground instead of being carried. Despite being high-energy, their small frame ensures that they can get plenty of exercise running around the home and withshort neighborhood walks. While Pomeranians can make great companions for a lot of homes, potential pet parents must learn aboutpositive reinforcement trainingandsocializationto ensure they develop into well-adapted dogs. Do not expect to adopt a Pomeranian puppy and have them grow into a friendly and well-mannered dog without investing in training and socialization. Socialization is a vital part of a Pomeranian puppy’s development, as it is with every dog. Without proper socialization and training, behaviors such asexcessive barking,reactive behavior,separation anxiety, and hyperactivity can emerge. Pomeranians respond well to positive reinforcement-based training. They also enjoy mentally stimulating activities, including training exercises and games. Keep training sessions positive, be consistent, and use patience. Because Pomeranians require lots of grooming, get them used to being touched all over their bodies so they are well-behaved and calm while at grooming appointments. Fetch Agility Obedience training Flirt poles Puzzle toys Walks To keep their fluffy coat free from tangles and matting, Pomeranians require consistent grooming. Because of this, talk to their veterinarian about adding fish oil to their diet to help moisturize the skin. Monitor your dog’s skin during grooming for any changes, and talk to your veterinarian if you notice any redness, flakiness, orlumps and bumps. Pomeranians have very thick fur, and because of how dense and long their hair can be, routine trips to a professional groomer can be helpful to maintain coat health. A groomer can also provide a sanitary shave, which removes the hair around their rear end so waste doesn’t get caught and accumulate in the coat. How often you bathe your dogdepends on their lifestyle and medical conditions. Dogs without a history of skin disease can usually be bathed every month or two. Bathing more frequently may be necessary if your dog gets dirty or to treat skin conditions. Between grooming appointments,Pomeranians need to be brushedat least two or three times a week. They should be brushed daily during shedding seasons (spring and fall). If you have a light-colored Pomeranian, tear stains may be an issue. When this happens, use a dog-friendly eye cleaner to wipe away the discharge as needed. Long hair around the face has the potential to get into the eyes and cause irritation and infection. Talk with your veterinarian or groomer to help trim the hairs around your dog’s eyes. Because a Pomeranian’s ears are erect, they are less likely to getear infectionsthan floppy-eared dogs. But ear infections are still possible, and it’s important to take steps to prevent them. After bathing your Pomeranian, you can use avet-recommended ear cleaner that contains drying agentsto remove lingering water from the ear canal. Ask your vet the best method forcleaning your dog’s earsand schedule a checkup if you noticesigns of an ear infection. The best way to prevent dental disease is to brush your dog’s teeth every day. Always use adog-safe toothpasteandtoothbrush—never human toothpaste, which can be toxic for pups. If you’re purchasing a Pomeranian puppy, make sure the parents have been genetically tested for hip, knee, heart, thyroid, and eye problems. If you are adopting a Pomeranian from a rescue or shelter, you can still work with your veterinarian to get the necessary genetic testing to learn if your dog is at risk. Certain over-the-counterdog DNA testscan also help identify potential health risks. Pomeranians require quite a bit of grooming and upkeep for their thick coats. They’re also known for being quite vocal, so you can expect some barking. This breed is known for being a big personality in a pint-sized body, so make sure you can meet their care needs. Also, because Pomeranians are small and fluffy like many prey species, such as rabbits, be diligent about watching them while they are outside. Predatory birds and other animals may mistake your dog for their usual prey. The average Pomeranian price depends on where you live, the dog’s bloodline, and the breeder you work with, among other factors. Expect to pay at least $1,500, with some Pomeranian breeders selling puppies for several thousand dollars more. Pomeranians have a bright attitude, intelligence, and an active nature. They can make great family dogs. However, special consideration should be given if there are or will be young children in the home. Pomeranians are small, so rough play or dropping them can cause injuries and evenbroken bones. Yes, Pomeranians are very intelligent. Pomeranians are already tiny dogs, and breeding them to be even smaller can cause significant health issues. Be wary about working with a breeder who claims to sellteacup Pomeranian puppies. APomskyis a cute Pomeranian-Huskymix first bred in 2012. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I am from Washington, DC, and I wanted to be a veterinarian since watching my uncle on his farm at 8. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians