SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/puli

Adobe_stock/Victoria The Puli is amedium-sized dog breedbest recognized for a long coat of cords. Pulik (the plural form of Puli)originated in Hungaryas herding dogs and guardians, and the breed is thought to have descended fromTibetan Terriersthat were brought to Hungary in 900 CE. Puli dogs are smart, affectionate, and bonded to their family. Full-grown Pulik stand 16–17 inches tall and typically weigh 25–35 pounds. They have an average lifespan of 10–15 years. As a herding dog, the Puli is asmart dogthat needs exercise andmental stimulationto be happy. When left to their own devices, a bored Puli maybark a lot. They need at least one hour of activity every day. Pulik do not shed, but they require daily grooming to manage their cords. Their very dense corded coat cancause them to overheat, so be careful during hot weather and ensure they always have access to fresh water and shade. Additionally, their coat becomes heavy when wet, so pay close attention if yourPuli goes for a swim. Pulik are generally ahealthy breed without a lot of issues. But like all dogs, Pulik can develop a few health conditions. In addition to these, all dogs are at risk of injury and illness. Purchasing pet insurancemay help cover expensive medical needs. Hip dysplasiais a genetic disease characterized by a loose hip joint that causes the cartilage and bone to wear down. This can causeosteoarthritis, and arthritis leads to pain, limping, and difficulty standing. Veterinarians often recommend low-intensity exercise andjoint supplementsfor dogs diagnosed with hip dysplasia. When pain is present,non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)or a monoclonal antibody injection like Librela are frequently prescribed. Surgery may be recommended in severe cases of hip dysplasia. Indogs with patellar luxation, the kneecap slips out of its proper groove. This causes discomfort and, like hip dysplasia, can lead to arthritis. One common sign of patellar luxation is a bunny-hopping gait, in which an affected dog will skip on three legs. The knee can realign on its own in some cases, butsupplements, anti-inflammatory medications, or pain-blocking injections are required for some dogs. In severe cases, your veterinarian may recommend surgery. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a group of diseases that causes the rods and cones on the eye’s retina (the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye) to break down. Difficulty seeing in the dark is often the first sign, but over time PRA progresses to blindness. PRA is an inherited disease in most cases, and there are currently no effective treatments. Talk to your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision. Degenerative myelopathy (DM)is a neurologic disorder that affects the spinal cord. The first signs are weakness in the hind end, and the dog may have difficulty rising. Eventually, the weakness progresses into paralysis in the hind legs. There is a DNA test for this condition, and affected Puli dogs should not be bred. Management involvesphysical therapy, andacupuncturecan also be helpful to slow the progression. A good way to ensure your Hungarian Puli receives a complete and balanced diet is to offer food approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Puli puppies need adiet formulated specifically for puppiesor designated for all life stages. When they’re around 1 year old, Pulik should slowlytransition to adult food. Pulik do best with two measured feedings per day. Puli puppies should be fed roughly three meals per day on a regular schedule to help maintain stable blood sugar andavoid hypoglycemia. The recommended caloric intake for a Puli dog varies between individuals and is based on your specific dog’s size, metabolism, health, neuter status, and activity level. The feeding guide labels on your dog food packaging provide information on portion sizes based on your dog’s weight. However, the best way to determine how much to feed your dog is to talk with your veterinarian, who can calculate your dog’s caloric needs based on their lifestyle and health. Pulik require a balance of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats to stay healthy and in a good body condition. At your vet’s recommendation, Pulik may benefit from the addition of omega-3 fatty acids into their diets (found in skin and joint supplements,fish oil, and in some specially formulated dog foods). These fatty acids act as natural anti-inflammatories that help support the Puli’s skin, coat, kidneys, joints, and heart. The Puli’s history as a herder and guardian has a big impact on the breed’s temperament. According to the Puli Club of America (PCA), the breed is intelligent and loyal to their family members but can bereserved around new people. When properly introduced, most Pulik are patient with youngchildren who know how to interact with dogs. However, Puli dogs need to learn that kids aren’t to be herded (which they might try to do). The Puli dog breed is active, intelligent, and playful, according to the PCA. Because of their herding instincts, they may try to round up children or small animals, and they can bark excessively if they’re allowed to grow bored. Pulik are smart and eager to please their family. This combination makes training easier than in some other breeds, although some Puli dogs can be more independently minded. These playful dogs will learn best through training games andpositive reinforcement methods. Begin training when your Pulik puppy is young and continue working on cues throughout their life. It’s also important tosocialize your puppyfrom a young age so they learn to be comfortable and confident around new people. Pulik were historically farm guardians, so without socialization they might be wary of strangers. Agility Herding Obedience training Nose work Fetch Walking Hiking Most adult Puli dogs have a long, corded, double coat that comes in colors including black, silver, and white. These cords are dense and grow naturally, and they require extensive care from the pet parent. Puli puppies are born without their characteristic cords. When your pup is just under a year old (typically 8–10 months of age), their fur will begin clumping together and feel thicker to the touch. These clumps need to be separated by hand and turned into distinct mats. You may need to do this repeatedly over the next year as the mats turn into longer, tighter cords. However,the PCA sayssome Puli dogs have fur that cords easily on its own. Pulik should bebathed as needed. After bathing, pay special attention to the dog’s cords. You’ll need to squeeze excess water out of the cords; do not rub the fur dry with a towel. After your Puli goes for a swim or takes a bath, it’s important that their fur is dried completely with a fan or blow dryer. Moisture that becomes trapped between the dog’s cords can cause mildew andskin infections. Pulik don’t require special eye care, but because the breed is susceptible to PRA, contact your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes (such asdischarge,cloudiness, or squinting). Clean your dog’s earsregularly with aveterinary-approved cleanerto prevent ear infections; ask your veterinarian how often to do this. Talk to your vet if you notice signs of an infection, such as ear odor or debris buildup. Care should be taken when managing the cords on a Puli’s ears, as the ears are sensitive and the skin is thin. Pulik typically make great pets and become closely attached to their family. They have a history as watchdogs, so they may bark to guard their home or family. Mental and physical activity is important for the Puli and may limit barking. While Puli dogs do not shed much, daily care is needed to manage their cords. Due to the Puli’s thick, double corded coat, pet parents need to be careful that their pup doesn't overheat. Yes, Puli dogs can be a good fit for families who provide them with mental stimulation, exercise, and early socialization. Pulik naturally form mats that can be hand-shaped into long cords that resemble locks. When they are puppies, they have a soft coat that does not form cords until they’re 8–10 months old. These cords tighten up with time. Pulik are rare in the United States. This may be related to their extensive grooming needs. TheAmerican Kennel Club (AKC) ranked the Pulias the 164th most popular breed out of 200 dogs in 2023. Purchasing a Puli puppy from a breeder can cost $1,000 to $3,000. Dogs of certain lineage may cost more. You may also be able to adopt a dog throughthe breed club’s Puli rescueorganization. Virginia LaMon graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians