SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/dogo-argentino

Adobe_stock/tyurina The Dogo Argentino was developed in the Republic of Argentina by a breeder named Dr. He focused on crossbreeding large, hardworking dogs to create an excellent partner for big-game hunting, according to theDogo Argentino Club of America (DACA). The Dogo Argentino’s size reaches up to 27 inches at the shoulder, and the dogs weigh 80–100 pounds. The muscular breed is tenacious,intelligent, and loyal. Because Dogo Argentinos were originally bred to behunting dogs, they are loyal and energetic companions. The Dogo Argentino has a short, smoothwhite coat. Occasional bathing is recommended, but intensive brushing and coat maintenance is not necessary. That said, Dogo Argentino dogs shed regularly, and brushing will help reduce this. This breed is thick and muscular, with a bulky, boxy head and heavy jowls that make them moderate droolers. Because these dogs are athletically built and energetic, they require lots of daily exercise, such aslong walks,running, andplaying fetch. Dogo Argentinos can become destructive when they’re bored, so regular exercise is also important for maintaining their mental well-being as well as their physical health. They can be independent-minded when it comes to training, so a Dogo Argentino requires experienced pet parents to ensure an appropriate upbringing. The Dogo Argentino is generally avery healthy dogwith an average lifespan of 9–15 years, but they can develop some conditions common in large breed dogs and also specific disorders due to their genetic predisposition. You can gain further insight into your Dogo Argentino’s health by screening them for over 230 genetic health risks with adog DNA test. Hip dysplasiais a common orthopedic disorder affecting large dog breeds. It results from an inherited defect of the hip joint, due to the ball (head of the thigh bone) and socket (in the pelvis) not aligning normally. Hip dysplasia can develop severearthritis, a debilitating disease that causes progressive pain and difficulty moving as the dog ages. Talk to your vet if you notice any signs of hip dysplasia in your Dogo Argentino, such as limping, difficulty rising from rest, a bunny-hopping gait, or reluctance to run, jump, or go up and down stairs. Treatment depends on the hip dysplasia’s severity and can range fromweight management, joint support changes, exercise, andNSAIDstocorrective surgery. Dental diseaseis a common ailment among all dogs and cats. The Dogo Argentino isn’t susceptible to more dental diseases than other large breeds, but pet parents still need to maintain their Dogo’sdental hygiene at hometo prevent tartar buildup and gingivitis. Once tartar starts to accumulate on teeth, it can be very difficult to remove. Brushing your dog’s teethat least three times per week (though ideally every day) is recommended. Annualdental cleanings with a veterinarianare also strongly advised once a Dogo Argentino turns 2 years old. Gastric dilatation-volvulus, a severe form ofbloat in dogs, is an emergency condition that occurs in large, deep-chested dogs like the Dogo Argentino. It consists of the stomach bloating and flipping over itself in a way that stops blood supply to the organ. If not addressed immediately, GDV is fatal. To prevent this from happening, agastropexy procedureis recommended in young Dogo Argentino dogs at the time of theirspayingorneutering surgeries. A gastropexy secures the stomach to the interior body wall, preventing it from flipping in cases of bloat. Dogo Argentino puppies can be born deaf, anddeafness in these dogsis typically related to their white coat color. Deaf dogs can live long and relatively normal lives with a few care adjustments from their pet parents, likeusing hand signalsinstead of verbal cues during training. Laryngeal paralysisis typically caused by a disorder with the nerve that opens and closes the larynx, or vocal folds, of large-breed dogs. This disorder causes the folds to open only partially or to not open at all. A poorly functioning larynx can cause increased breathing sounds or actual difficulty with breathing. This disorder can be managed surgically in moderate to severe cases. Hypothyroidism(underactive thyroid) occurs when a dog’s thyroid gland doesn’t produce enough thyroid hormone. Low levels of thyroid hormone can cause weight gain, disorders with a dog’s coat, increased susceptibility to ear andskin infections, and low energy. This condition can develop in middle-aged dogs and is managed with lifelong medication. Dogo Argentino and other large orgiant dogsare more likely than smaller breeds to develop hypothyroidism. All dogs must eat a food that meets theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional guidelines. This ensures your Dogo Argentino receives acomplete and balanced diet. Because of their size, Dogo Argentinos need to eat a food formulated for large breeds. Dogo Argentino puppies need to eat apuppy food for large breedsfor the right balance of  nutrients for their fast-growing bodies. If Dogo Argentinos grow too large too quickly, thisputs their joints at risk of developing problems. Most adult dogs do well with two meals per day. As puppies, Dogo Argentinos should be fed more often—up to three times daily. Speak with your veterinarian about the best way to feed your puppy. Dogo Argentinos can be particularly eager eaters, soslow-feeding bowlscome in handy to prevent rapid food ingestion. Dogs that eat too quickly often inhale large amounts of air, which can lead to bloating and life-threatening episodes of GDV. Other ways to prevent bloat and GDV include: Restricting exercise just before and after your Dogo eats Avoiding elevated food bowls Feeding your dog two or three meals every day instead of one big meal Always work with your veterinarian to determinethe right amount of food to feed your dog, as this varies depending on your Dogo Argentino’s weight, lifestyle, health, and other factors. Preventingobesity in your dogis important, as obesity can cause or worsen certain health conditions. A dog eating an AAFCO-compliant dog food should receive all needed nutrients, but your vet may prescribe adog supplementon a case by case basis, such as: Fish oil supplementsthat contain omega-3, -6, and -9 fatty acids help support the health of the skin and haircoat, heart, kidneys, and joints. Ajoint supplementcontaining methylsulfonylmethane (MSM), glucosamine, and chondroitin may be recommended because Dogo Argentino dogs are prone to developing arthritis and hip dysplasia. Your veterinarian will be able to direct you to specific supplement brands and let you know how to give them to your dog safely. A Dogo Argentino’s personality traits are influenced by their history as big game hunters. They are energetic, courageous dogs that are affectionate with and loyal to their family members. Dogo Argentinos may be reserved around strangers at first. But when they’rewell-socializedand properly introduced to new people and animals, Dogos can be friendly and laid-back. They can make good playmates for olderchildren who know how to properly interact with dogs, thanks to the Dogo’s energetic nature. Always supervise children and dogs when they are together. These dogs tend to be quiet and won’tbark excessively, but they do have astrong prey drivesince they were bred to be hunting dogs. Dogo Argentinos need to be on a leash or kept inside of fenced-in areas to prevent them from running after small animals, like neighborhood rabbits or squirrels. Unsupervised Dogo Argentinos tend toeat things they shouldn’tor get into mischief. To keep your Dogo safe, happy, and healthy, always keep a watchful eye on them and follow a daily schedule designed to wear out their physical and mental energy. Dogo Argentinos might not be agood dog for first-time pet parentsbecause they come with a high energy level and a strong prey drive. They’re smart dogs but were bred to work independently, which means they can have a mind of their own and require patience for training. Always usepositive reinforcement training methodswith a Dogo Argentino and make training sessions engaging and fun. It’s also important to begin socializing your Dogo Argentino puppy early so they grow to be comfortable and confident in new situations and with people and pets outside their household. Playing ball Walking or running on leash Hunting Agility Obedience training Dogo Argentinos have short, soft coats and are moderate shedders. They can be bathed once or twice weekly, or as needed when excessively dirty. Dogos do not have coats that require detangling or clipping. Dogo Argentinos do not typically have sensitive skin, but they can have non-pigmented regions of skin under their white hair,making them prone to sunburn. Be careful about allowing them to lounge in direct sunlight for long periods of time—this includes hanging their head out of the car window during long drives. Dog-safe sunscreencan help keep their skin from burning. Dogo Argentinos have a short coat that isn’t at risk of matting but will shed regularly year-round. Regular brushingcan help remove loose hair and keep it from ending up on your floor and furniture. Because of their white coat, Dogo Argentino candevelop tear stainsunder their eyes. These can be easily wiped away withdog tear stain removers. Talk to your vet if you notice any changes in your dog’s eyes, such asdischarge,redness, orcloudiness. The Dogo Argentino breed doesn’t have special needs aside from regular ear care. Your veterinarian will advise you if a regular ear cleaning schedule is recommended in the case of chronicear infections, and how often toclean their ears at home. Ask your vet whichear cleaning productsto use. While they can live well with pets they’ve been raised with, it might not be a good idea to bring home a Dogo Argentino puppy if you already have small animals due to the Dogo’s strong prey drive. They also do best in a home with a fenced-in yard to keep them safe when outside, and they are typically not well-suited for apartment living. These dogs require consistent training and need pet parents that can accommodate their energy requirements, as they become easily bored. They do best with a pet parent who has time to devote to the energy of these dogs. Ultimately, the Dogo Argentino is a special breed that requires a significant amount of training, physical exercise, and mental enrichment. That said, they make affectionate and loyal partners for pet parents who can meet their needs. The average Dogo Argentino price varies, but you can expect to pay $1,000–$3,000. With a family that’s equipped to handle the breed’s high energy, prey drive, and training needs, a Dogo Argentino can make a loyal and loving companion. Yes, Dogo Argentinos are highly intelligent animals. Because of this, they require training that involves significantmental stimulation. They also make wonderful working dogs when trained for military or police work, search and rescue, or service work. While Dogo Argentinos andAmerican Pit Bull Terrierslook similar, they are separate dog breeds. The Dogo Argentino was historically developed from crossing many different breeds, including theBoxer,Great Dane,Bull Terrier,Irish Wolfhound,English Pointer, andDogue de Bordeaux. Yes, Dogo Argentinos are legal in the U. However, they are banned in a few other countries, including in the U. While they are similar in size and appearance, there are differences between a Dogo Argentino and aCane Corso. One way to tell the breeds apart is by color. Dogo Argentinos are always white, while a Cane Corso can have a black, gray, brindle, or fawn coat. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Heather is a practicing small animal veterinarian in Denver, CO. In her free time she enjoys hiking, horseback riding, and traveling to new. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians