SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/australian-shepherd

Istock/Bigandt_Photography Australian Shepherds arehighly intelligentand activemedium-sized dogswith natural herding instincts and muscular and agile builds. They were originally bred to be used as working dogs and still have a strong drive to get jobs done and please their people. Standing between 18–23 inches tall at the shoulder, the average Australian Shepherd weight is 40–65 pounds when full-grown, with males being generally larger than females. Australian Shepherd tails can be naturally bobbed, or they can be born with full-length tails. Most Aussie puppies have their tails docked at a young age, though this practice is controversial. While tail docking can be done to prevent working dogs from tail-related injuries, theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)opposes docking for purely cosmetic reasons. Australian Shepherds are high-energy dogs who love to have a job. They are known to be smart and loyal dogs who are typically friendly but can sometimes take a bit of time to warm up to strangers. Due to their herding background, Australian Shepherds can have a strongprey driveand lovegames like fetch. But they might also like to chase moving objects—such as children, cats, cars, and other wheeled objects like scooters, bikes, and golf carts. However, withearly socialization, they can live harmoniously with cats, children, and other dogs. With their lifestyle and temperament being so high-energy, pet parents of Australian Shepherd dogs need to be considerate of their joint and hip health to ensure healthy mobility at all life stages. Hip dysplasiaandelbow dysplasiaare inherited conditions that sometimes affect Australian Shepherds. These conditions occur when either the hip or elbow joints develop improperly, resulting in malalignment. This can causeosteoarthritisand pain. It’s very important that breeders obtain certified screening for these genetic conditions prior to breeding any Australian Shepherd to reduce the risk of passing these conditions on to their puppies. Dogs with hip or elbow dysplasia need special care, particularly as they age; the amount of care will depend on the severity of the dysplasia. Management options includemedications,joint supplements, and therapies. There are alsosurgical treatment optionsthat can help improve mobility. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a term used for a group of eye diseases. These degenerative diseases affect the photoreceptors in a dog’s retina, which are responsible for helping dogs see better in low light, detect movement, and detect color. As the cells deteriorate (atrophy) over time, a dog’s vision will deteriorate as well—eventually resulting in incurable blindness. PRA can present itself in dogs between 3–9 years old. There is also an early onset form of PRA that can affect Australian Shepherd puppies within their first few months of life. PRA is an inherited condition, so dogs who have been diagnosed should not be bred. Though it’s not a painful condition for dogs, there is no current effective treatment or cure for PRA. The first signs of PRA are typically night blindness and increased clumsiness (walking/bumping into things). However, because dogs rely heavily on other senses as well, they can live long, happy lives without vision. Australian Shepherds are at risk for another serious, inherited eye disease calledcollie eye anomaly, which is associated with many abnormalities affecting the back of the eye. Affected dogs often also have eyes that are smaller than normal and that lie farther back in the eye socket than normal. Dogs with collie eye anomaly may see normally, but when the disease is more severe, they often have poor vision or can even be completely blind. Hereditary cataractscan also occur in Australian Shepherds and the genes that increase risk can be passed on from parents to their puppies. Hereditary cataracts most commonly occur in dogs between 1–5 years old. A cataract is a “clouding” of the lens of a dog’s eye. This clouding prevents the passage of light and images to the retina, which reduces a dog’s vision. Cataracts can progress over time and sometimes lead to blindness orglaucoma. Currently, the only approved treatment option for cataracts is surgery. Your veterinarian can recommend a board-certified veterinary ophthalmologist to determine if cataract surgery is appropriate. Iris colobomais another ocular condition that more commonly affects Australian Shepherds. This condition occurs when the iris (the colored part of the eye that surrounds the pupil) fails to develop properly, which can result in an iris that has holes or notches in it and an increased sensitivity to light. While light sensitivity and the discomfort it causes will not greatly affect quality of life, these will need to be considered when determining the best lifestyle for your dog. In some cases,dog gogglescan be used to act as sunglasses and reduce the impact of light sensitivity. But to prevent further eye complications, it’s recommended that severely affected dogs are kept out of bright and direct sunlight. This is an inherited condition, so breeding pairs should be certified to have normal eyes by a board-certified veterinary ophthalmologist, with the results recorded through the Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF). There is no treatment available. Australian Shepherd puppies should have their eyes examined by a veterinary ophthalmologist after 6 weeks of age. Primaryepilepsy, aseizure disordercaused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain, is another inherited condition seen in Australian Shepherds. Unfortunately, there is no genetic testing available to identify which dogs may carry genes associated with epilepsy. Depending on the frequency of the seizures, dogs with this condition may require lifelong daily anti-seizure medications to control their symptoms. Multidrug resistanceis a genetic mutation most commonly found in herding breeds, including Australian Shepherds. When dogs have this condition, it can affect how their body processes certain drugs and medications. The MDR1 (also called ABCB1) gene makes dogs more sensitive to certain ingredients found in commonly usedmedications for flea, tick, and heartworm prevention. The result is that dogs with the MDR1 gene experience more significant side effects to these medicines at doses that would normally be tolerated by dogs of similar size. The MDR1 gene can be detected with a DNA test. Talk with your veterinarian about testing and DNA test options. They will also be able to provide guidance on alternative medication options that will not lead to drug-related toxicity. Certain genes that control the coat color of an Australian Shepherd can affect their hearing. Dogs who have two merle-colored parents (there are red and blue merle Australian Shepherds) and have inherited double-merle genes are more likely to be whiter in color. This lack of pigment can affect their hearing as well, especially if there is a lot of white color on the head or ears. A BAER (Brainstem Auditory Evoked Response) test can be performed to determine if deafness is present. Lymphosarcomais a cancer seen more commonly in Australian Shepherds. This disease occurs when the body forms lots of abnormal lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. It often presents as swollen lymph nodes, but these abnormal cells can develop in any organ in the body. Thankfully, it’s one of the most treatable forms of cancer in veterinary patients, with a good success rate indogs receiving chemotherapy. However, prognosis varies depending on the type of cells involved, how advanced the cancer is at diagnosis, and other factors. Hemangiosarcomais a devastating cancer that has an increased incidence in Australian Shepherds. It most commonly presents as a bleeding tumor within the abdomen, typically affecting the spleen, although it can also develop elsewhere (the heart, for example). Hemangiosarcoma can lead to: Acute lethargy Weakness Collapse Pale gums Typically, surgery is required to control the internal bleeding and for definitive diagnosis of the type of tumor. Unfortunately, even with chemotherapy the prognosis is very poor, with average survival time of six to nine months with both surgery and chemotherapy. Learn about CarePlus, insurance plans with exclusive Chewy benefits Pet insurance that can cover Rx costs and more Australian Shepherds should be fed a high-quality diet that follows guidelines approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Fresh water should be available at all times. Australian Shepherds with a working job (search and rescue, herding on a farm, or guide dogs) or high activity level (field training,flyball,run several miles a day,hike frequently) may require a higher protein/higher fat diet to meet their needs. Diets labeled as “performance” or “sport” should be considered under the guidance of a veterinarian. Australian Shepherds can usually be fed normally with a standard pet food bowl. Meal feeding helps to monitor appetite as well as control intake; this is preferred over filling the bowl and allowing your dog to graze. Some Australian Shepherds who are highly food motivated may be prone to eating too fast. For these dogs, it’s worth considering aslow feeder bowlto help them slow down and prevent gastrointestinal upset. How much you feed an Australian Shepherddepends on their life stage,body condition score, activity level, and the brand/type of food you’re feeding. Growing Australian Shepherd puppies should be fed a standard puppy food until they are spayed/neutered or reach maturity, at approximately 12–16 months old. Feed your pup three or four meals a dayon a consistent schedule. Once they reach their full, adult size, Aussies should be slowlytransitioned to a high-quality adult dietor performance diet if they have excessively high energy demands—such as working dogs or dogs who accompany pet parents on lengthy fitness routines like running and hiking. Despite their high energy levels, some Australian Shepherds can beprone to gaining weightas they age, so frequent reevaluation of their dietary needs is important. Your veterinarian may recommend testing for conditions that may promote abnormal weight gain, such ashypothyroidismorCushing’s disease. Australian Shepherds can develop osteoarthritis as they age. Your vet may recommend joint supplements or special foods as part of their treatment. Australian Shepherds also are predisposed to certain eye conditions, so supplements targeting eye health may also be beneficial. Never give your dog supplements without speaking with your vet first. Australian Shepherds are loyal, intelligent dogs with a strong character. Many Aussies are quite friendly, but some can be reserved toward new people. But with a proper introduction, they will often warm up and be accepting. As with all dog breeds, early socialization is very important. Australian Shepherds can be good with children, cats, and other dogs as long as they are well socialized. But know that their innate herding tendencies may still result in their attempting to herd other small animals and children if this behavior is not redirected. Australian Shepherds are highly energetic and maintain their energy levels through their adult life and sometimes into their senior years. As a result, consistent exercise andmental stimulationis a must for this breed. Without an outlet for their energy, the Australian Shepherd may develop destructive behaviors, such as digging andchewing. With proper training, good socialization, and regular exercise, Australian Shepherds can be very well-behaved dogs. They are also very loyal and attentive to their family, so it’s not uncommon for them to become a shadow and follow their pet parents around as much as possible. In some cases, this attachment to their favorite humans can develop intoseparation anxiety. Be sure to work with a trainer or veterinary behaviorist if your dog becomes overly upset in your absence. Australian Shepherds are athletic and agile. Withoutthorough and proper recall training, this breed should be kept on a leash or confined to a secure, fenced yard. They are master escape artists if left unattended and are apt to chase neighborhood squirrels or (worse!) cars. Australian Shepherds are very intelligent and motivated dogs who respond to training readily. Alwaysuse positive reinforcement when training. High-level exercise and long-distance running/hiking sessions should be avoided until your Australian Shepherd puppy is fully grown, which typically occurs between 12–16 months. This helps ensure they don’t hurt their joints, hips, and elbows during their growth years, which could lead to long-term mobility issues. Agility training Field trials Herding trials Flyball Advanced obedience training Hiking Running Fetch Long walks Aussies have a double-layer, water-resistant coat. There are many different Australian Shepherd colors and patterns, including red merle, blue merle, red, and black. Their eyes are typically brown or blue. Because their coat is medium in length, Aussies require routine upkeep and weekly care. Their active, outdoor lifestyle will also mean they need more frequent grooming. Groom your Aussie at least once a week. Not only will this keep them looking their best but will also allow you to keep a close eye on their skin. Monitor your dog’s skin for any changes, and talk to your veterinarian if you notice any redness, flakiness, orlumps and bumps. Due to their active nature, Australian Shepherds are often outdoors in the mud and dirt. This meansfrequent bathingwill often be part of your grooming routine. Frequent brushing canhelp minimize shedding. It’s not recommended to shave an Australian Shepherd’s hair, as their double coat helps to protect them from both heat and cold by holding a layer of temperate air close to their body. Because Australian Shepherds are predisposed to certain eye issues, routinely checking them and monitoring forexcessive dischargeor any changes in appearance is a good habit to get into. Talk to your vet if you notice anything different about your pup’s eyes. With the increased need for bathing and floppy ears, it's important to clean andcheck your Australian Shepherd’s earsroutinely. Bycleaning their ears, you can help prevent infections or the buildup of dirt or debris. These cleanings also ensure that you fully dry your dog’s ears after each grooming session to prevent moisture buildup, which can lead toear infections. Trim your dog's nailsregularly to prevent overgrowth. If you can hear them clacking on hard surfaces, it's time for a trim. Brush your Aussie's teethevery day to preventdental disease in your dog, which can lead to infection, tooth loss, and even damage to other organs. Giving yourdog dental chewscan help protect their teeth, but it's no substitute for regular brushing. Always brush your dog's teeth with adog-friendly toothpaste—never human toothpaste. Australian Shepherds are highly energetic dogs who rarely slow down. This means they require daily devoted exercise for physical and mental stimulation their whole life. Pet parents must be committed to providing Australian Shepherds with the time and attention they require; otherwise, their undirected energy can make them more likely to exhibit destructive behaviors. Training and socialization are vital parts of the Australian Shepherd’s development and mental growth. Australian Shepherds also thrive with advanced training exercises and fun dog sports, so be ready to invest heavily in their training—both with your time and finances. The average Australian Shepherd lifespan is 12–15 years. Australian Shepherds shed throughout the year, though they shed heavily in the spring and fall. Australian Shepherds are medium-sized dogs, standing 18–24 inches tall and weighing between 40 and 65 pounds. There are also Miniature American Shepherds, a breed that looks like mini Australian Shepherds. These dogs don’t grow larger than 18 inches tall and weigh 20–40 pounds. Border Colliesand Australian Shepherds are both high-energy herding dogs with similar appearances. But Border Collies tend to be leaner than Aussies (at 30–55 pounds). Border Collies were also bred in Scotland, while Australian Shepherds originated in the U. Australian Shepherds can make excellent family dogs. However, it’s important to ensure they are well socialized with children so they don’t try to herd them. Australian Shepherds are highly intelligent and very receptive to training and mastering tasks/skills quickly. But this also means they are great escape artists and excellent at finding outlets for mental stimulation (no matter how destructive) if not provided constructive ones. Cost can vary depending on the breeder, location, lineage, and color markings. The average Australian Shepherd price typically ranges between $500–$2,000. United States Australian Shepherd AssociationAustralian Shepherd Health & Genetics Institute United States Australian Shepherd Association Australian Shepherd Health & Genetics Institute WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Ryan is a 2012 graduate of Michigan State College of Veterinary Medicine. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians