SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/emergency/poisoning-toxicity/antifreeze-poisoning-dogs

IN PARTNERSHIP WITH Istock/Oleh_Slobodeniuk  Antifreeze poisoning happens when dogs ingestethylene glycol, a highly toxic chemical found in automotive antifreeze. Even small amounts can belethal to dogs, and immediate emergency care is critical. Antifreeze used for RVs, boats, cabins, and other equipment often containspropylene glycolinstead of ethylene glycol. While the names sound similar, they pose very different risks if ingested. Therefore, if your dog ingests antifreeze, it’s important to determine the type before treatment begins. For antifreeze containing ethylene glycol, pet parents must stay vigilant about preventing access to automotive fluids, leaking bottles, or pans used in car maintenance. If you suspect your dog ingested any type of antifreeze, contact your veterinarian or Pet Poison Helpline at 1-855-764-7661 immediately. Antifreeze poisoning occurs when a dog ingests ethylene glycol or another toxic form of antifreeze. Typically, there is a suspicion that a pet had access to, or was near, a puddle of antifreeze or fluids from automobiles. When a dog ingests ethylene glycol, symptoms often appear within a few hours after the ingestion and may includevomiting, increased thirst and urination, and ataxia (lack of coordination when walking). Additional symptoms that may develop over the next 8 to 48 hours include panting, seizures, and coma. If you suspect your pet ingested ethylene glycol, call thePet Poison Helplineat 855-764-7661 or seek emergency veterinary care immediately. Do not wait for symptoms to appear, as a delay in treatment often results in death. Ethylene glycol is an odorless, sweet-tasting liquid. After ingestion, dogs may vomit and appear disoriented or have difficulty walking. Once metabolized, ethylene glycol causes acutekidney failure, which is fatal without early treatment. Therefore, it’s extremely important to begin treatment before kidney damage develops. Common sources of ethylene glycol include: Antifreeze used in automobile engines Windshield wiper fluid and deicing agents Brake fluid Paint and ink The amount of ethylene glycol varies by product. While antifreeze is the most concentrated and dangerous (typically 50–100%), other products usually contain lower concentrations and require larger ingestions to cause poisoning. Within 12 hours of ingestion: Vomiting Ataxia(incoordination when walking) Lethargy Inability to stand Increased drinkingand urination After 12 hours or longer of ingestion: Tremors Seizures Coma Panting No urination  If you suspect or know your dog ingested antifreeze or another product containing ethylene glycol,call Pet Poison Helpline (855-764-7661) or seek emergency veterinary care immediately. Even a small amount can be deadly, and the sooner treatment is started, the better the outcome. If possible, locate the product container. The more information that can be obtained regarding the product, including the brand, ingredients, and concentration, the more accurate an assessment can be made as to whether treatment is necessary and what kind. For the best outcome, treatment should begin within eight hours of ingestion. Two antidotes are available for antifreeze poisoning: ethanol and fomepizole. If either antidote is started within eight hours after ingestion and before significant symptoms orblood workabnormalities develop, prognosis is good. Prognosis declines sharply if treatment begins more than eight hours after ingestion or if  diagnostic tests show kidney damage or significant symptoms are present. When treated promptly and successfully, dogs who recover typically have no long-term effects. Keep dogs out of garages, sheds, or areas where antifreeze is stored. Store all chemicals securely, especially around pets (chemicals are also dangerous to cats). Avoid ethylene glycol-based ice melts. Instead, opt for pet-safe ice melts such asSafe Paw Pet-Safe Ice MeltorSnow Joe Friendly Premium Paws Safer Snow & Ice Melt. If your dog is able to paw open cabinets, consider using theMyPet Safety Cabinet Latch, and ensure that all products are stored far enough away from easy access. Immediately clean up any spills of antifreeze or other automotive liquids. Watch for suspicious puddles in driveways or garages and clean them promptly. Keep pets away from these areas to avoid accidental ingestion. Early symptoms of vomiting and ataxia can appear within minutes to 12 hours after ingestion. Signs of kidney failure, including seizures and coma, usually develop one to three days after ingestion. Yes, but only if treated quickly. The antidotes, ethanol and fomepizole, can prevent kidney failure and death when started within eight hours of ingestion. If treatment is delayed, the outcome depends on test results and the severity of symptoms. Early signs include vomiting, ataxia, depression, lethargy, and increased thirst and urination. Later signs include tremors, seizures, coma, panting, and inability to urinate, and ingestion without quick medical treatment can be fatal. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Pet Poison Helpline®, your trusted source for toxicology and pet health advice in times of potential emergency, is available 24 hours,. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians