SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/brittany-spaniel

Jamie Frevele Ready to welcome a new best friend into your household? The Brittany is more than ready for the job! Also known as the Brittany Spaniel or Brittany Dog, this sporty, sweet, and smart pup is perfect for a family with children or an energetic single person in search of a workout partner. The Brittany was originally bred as a hunting dog in France’s Brittany province in the 1800s, according to theAmerican Brittany Club. Despite being a little more compact (standing 17–20 inches tall and weighing 30–40 pounds), the French Brittany is still very athletic and has energy to spare. But with their soft coat and sensitive nature, the pups make great cuddlers, too. If you are adopting a Brittany, plan on introducing them to all your friends and family. Early socialization in Brittany puppies is a must—and when done correctly, they make peaceful and friendly family dogs. The Brittany was bred to be a hunting dog, so they are athletic dogs with a lot of energy. Plan to spend your days playing fetch, running, hiking, agility training, or romping around in the backyard when this dog is part of your family. But while theyrequire lots of mental stimulationand physical exercise, Brittany dogs are low-maintenance when it comes to grooming their orange-and-white coat. Brittany dogs are generally avery healthy breedwithout many notable health issues. But like every breed, there are a few health conditions to which the Brittany can be prone. Hip dysplasiais one of the few health issues some Brittany dogs may develop. This genetic condition affects the stability of the hip joint, occurring when the joint doesn’t fit together properly. This leads to a loose joint that, if left untreated, eventually causesosteoarthritis in dogs. Because the Brittany is an active breed, watch for signs of weakness in their back legs, or an aversion to playtime and exercise. Talk to your vet if you have concerns. Another genetic condition that often affects the Brittany isepilepsy, a disorder of the brain that results inseizures, but with an unknown cause. In dogs, an epileptic seizure can look like unusual behavior, such as incessant chewing, sniffing, head shaking, hiding, running erratically, or losing their balance. But it can also look like a standard seizure, where they fall over, convulse, and urinate and/or defecate. If your dog has a seizure that lasts longer than two minutes, see a vet right away. While upsetting to witness, these episodes are not fatal, and the condition can be treated with lifelong medication and monitoring. Brittany dogs, and other dogs with epilepsy, can still live a full, happy life. Hypothyroidismoccurs when the thyroid is slow to produce certain hormones. If your Brittany seems lethargic, is gaining weight, has chronic skin and ear infections, and isn’t their usual boisterous self, have your vet check their thyroid levels. Other symptoms include a dry, coarse coat that may or may not be falling out; droopy eyelids; and heat-seeking behavior. This is another non-fatal condition that can be treated with daily medication and will not affect yourBrittany Spaniel’s life span. Brittany Spaniels are prone tocataracts, which causes the eye lenses to become cloudy and leads to vision loss. If you notice your dog’s eyes have a somewhat milky appearance and they’re bumping into things, it’s time for an eye exam. Cataracts can be removed with surgery. Brittany dogs do best on a high-protein dietapproved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Go-to brands includePurina®,Royal Canin®, andHill’s Science Diet. Feed your Brittany twice a day—once in the morning and once at night. Because these sporty, active dogs can work up an appetite, feeding them on a schedule (and not free-feeding) is best so they don’tgain too much weight. Brittany Spanielpuppies need to eat even more frequently, about three or four times per day. The amount of food needed depends on your Brittany’s age, weight, and activity level. Consult your vet if you’re unsure about the best amount to feed your dog. As long as your Brittany is eating a high-quality dog food, they won’t need supplements unless your veterinarian recommends them. As a breed, the Brittany is one of the sweetest and most friendly dogs out there, and one way to assure this is to socialize your Brittany early. From an early age, let your Brittany puppy interact with new people, children, and other animals. Not only will this encourage confidence in your Brittany, but it will help them be less timid, as this dog can be quite sensitive. Their sensitive soul means Brittany dogs don’t do well when left alone for long periods, as they can beprone to separation anxiety. Eager-to-please, energetic Brittany Spaniels need to stay busy. If they become bored, they’ll find ways to entertain themselves, likechewing your couch cushionsorbarking loudly. The Brittany was bred to hunt birds, so they are hardwired with a high prey drive. This means they will chase birds (and possibly other smaller animals) whenever they’re outside. To keep your Brittany safe, keep them within a fenced space or on a leash whenever they’re outdoors. Smart, gentle, positive reinforcement training is the way to go with a Brittany. Though they’re eager to please the people they love and can pick up cues quickly, don’t make training sessions too long or your pup will get frustrated and bored. Keep training short, frequent, and fun—and always reward your Brittany with treats and praise. Fetch Long walks Running Hunting Hiking While lots of attention needs to go into keeping a Brittany active and mentally stimulated, you don’t have to worry that much about grooming their orange-and-white fur. Brittany dogs are not too prone to skin problems, but alwayscheck them for ticks, burrs, or cuts if you take your pup on a hike or hunting trip. Because they like to spend so much time running around outside, your Brittany willneed an occasional bathwhenever they get dirty or smelly. Regular brushing (about once a week) with a soft brush is all the typical Brittany needs to stay healthy and well-groomed. Their wavy fur does shed, especially in the spring and fall, so you might need to brush them more often during these seasons to keep up with flying fur. Brittanys have bright, clear eyes that don’t require a lot of attention as far as grooming goes. But because the breed is prone to some eye conditions, check with your vet if you notice changes, such as cloudiness ordischarge. Brittanys have floppy ears, which means it’s easy for debris and moisture to become trapped in the canals. This makes them susceptible toear infections. To prevent this,clean your Brittany’s earsafter you bathe them (or after they splash around in water) with adog-friendly ear cleaner. While not a good dog for couch potatoes, the Brittany can be the perfect, medium-size sporting dog for an active family with children and other pets. They need lots of care when it comes to staying busy and active, but these healthy dogs are relatively low-maintenance in almost every other aspect. If you’re a hunter, runner, or avid hiker, the Brittany is a go-to breed. The Brittany is an excellent family dog! Not only are they sweet and well-behaved with children of all ages, but they are also easy to train and built for lots of playtime. Brittany dogs do shed their coats, but brushing them weekly and giving them regular baths will help cut down on the fur that ends up on your furniture. Though they look similar, Brittanys andEnglish Springer Spanielsare quite different. For one, the Brittany isn’t technically a spaniel; the American Kennel Club officially removed “Spaniel” from their breed name in 1982, though they’re still commonly referred to as Brittany Spaniels. The Brittany was also bred in France in the 1800s, while the English Springer Spaniel has a longer history dating back at least several centuries that began in England. The average Brittany Spaniel lifespan is 12–14 years. Featured Image: iStock/freemixer WRITTEN BY Jamie Frevele Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians