SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/shichon

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Adobe_stock/Petra Richli What do you get when you mix the lap-lovingShih Tzuwith the playfulBichon Frise? A lively and lovable Shichon! The Shichon is a relatively new mix breed. Because of how recent this designer cross is, and because there is no strict breed standard, it can be difficult to say for certain what a Shichon dog’s temperament, appearance, and grooming needs will be. That said, the two well-established parent breeds are a template for making predictions. Shih Tzu boast noble Chinese ancestry, but don’t let their prideful appearance and high-maintenance hair fool you. According to thebreed standard, Shih Tzu were bred to be companions, and they are outgoing andfriendly dogs. As for Bichons, thebreed standarddescribes them as a “white powder puff of a dog” and says that a “cheerful attitude” is the “hallmark of the breed. ” When these two breeds combine, you can generally expect adog that’s smalland sturdy (a Shichon, full-grown, will be a maximum weight of 18 pounds) with lots of eye-catching hair. Eager to play and accepting of a wide range of playmates, Shichons rarely meet a stranger. With their compact size, social demeanor, moderate exercise requirements, and eager-to-please training style, Shichons areideal apartment dogsand agreat choice for first-time pet parents. However, that doesn’t mean caring for a Shichon is without important considerations—namely, their hair and their need for companionship. Both of the Shichon’s parents arelow-shedding breeds of “hypoallergenic” dogs, but they are not low-maintenance. Shih Tzu have long, flowing hair that needs to be brushed every day, regularly bathed, and professionally groomed. Bichons Frise have long, curly, velvety hair that also needs to be brushed every day, regularly bathed, and professionally groomed. So regardless of which parent your Shichon’s coat resembles, plan on an involved grooming routine. The Shichon’s parent breeds were born to be companions, and the proverbial apple hasn’t fallen far from the tree. With proper socialization, Shichons make fast friends with people of all ages and with other pets at home. And while Shichon dogs are fond of lap-sitting, their companionship needs include daily play and exercise with their loved ones. Both Shih Tzu and Bichons Frise are healthy breeds with life expectancies of 10–18 years and 14–15 years, respectively, and the Shichon’s lifespan is similar. Still, like all dogs, the two breeds are prone to various health conditions that can be passed on to their puppies. When the patella (kneecap) shifts outside its normal groove within the femur (thigh bone), it’s apatellar luxation(dislocation). This condition is more prevalent in smaller breeds, including Shih Tzu and Bichons. While a luxating patella doesn’t cause problems in some dogs, severe cases may require surgery. Signs of patellar luxation include: Limping Bunny-hopping A popping or cracking noise from the knee joint Periodontal disease, or gum disease, is a progressive condition where bacteria accumulate in the mouth, leading to damage to the dog’s gums, bones, and other tissues. While the disease is common in all dogs, small and toy breeds are especially prone to the problem. Brushing your dog’s teethfrequently (ideally every day) andregular professional cleaningsare the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Shih Tzu are prone to several eye conditions, including cataracts, dry eye syndrome, and progressive retinal atrophy (PRA). Bichons are also susceptible to developing cataracts, as well as corneal dystrophy. Cataractscause the lens to become cloudy, which stops light from reaching the retina and causesblindness in dogs. Cataracts are progressive but can be treated with surgery. Dry eye syndromeis when a dog doesn’t produce enough tears to lubricate and protect their eyes from infection and irritations. Most cases are treated with a medication to stimulate tear production. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is an umbrella term for eye disorders in which the rods and cones of the retina either don’t develop properly in puppies (early-onset PRA) or begin deteriorating in adulthood (late-onset PRA). There is no cure, and the condition eventually leads to blindness. Corneal dystrophyis a progressive condition that can cause adog’s eyes to become cloudy. Despite the cloudiness, most dogs with these types of corneal dystrophy maintain normal vision. Vision changes are often first noticed at night, with signs like your dog walking into doors or walls, stumbling, inability to use stairs, and/or crying. Contact your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision. Hip dysplasiais a condition where the hip joint doesn’t develop properly, leading to a loose joint and degenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis). Mild cases are treated with interventions includingphysical therapyandanti-inflammatory drugs, but severe cases may require one of severalhip dysplasia surgeryprocedures. Common signs of hip dysplasia include: Limping Reluctance to get up or jump Shifting of weight to front legs Loss of muscle mass in the back legs Hip pain Bichons are predisposed to developingdiabetes mellitus, a common disease in which the pancreas doesn’t produce enough insulin, a hormone that regulates the amount of sugar in the blood. Treatment involves a special diet,daily insulin injections, and blood sugar monitoring. Signs of illness include: Increased thirst Increased urination Dehydration Increased appetite Weight loss(or, less commonly, weight gain) Lethargy Bladder stonesare also more common in Bichons. These stones are made up of minerals (calcium oxalate, cystine, struvite, or calcium phosphate), and must either be surgically removed or dissolved with the help of aprescription diet. Signs of bladder stones include: Bloody urine Foul-smelling urine Difficulty urinating (straining) Urinating frequentlyand/or in small amounts No two Shichon dogs are exactly alike, so it’s important to partner with your veterinarian inchoosing the best foodand feeding plan for your dog. Your vet can recommend a food that meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards and is nutritionally complete for your pet’s life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior), size, and health history. Shichon dogs may benefit fromfood designed for small breeds. There are alsobreed-specific foods for both Bichons FriseandShih Tzu. Ask your vet if one of these diets is appropriate for your Shichon. Shichon puppies need frequent meals (three or four a day) to avoidhypoglycemia(low blood sugar). Adult Shichon dogs can be fed less frequently—typically two or three times a day. Your vet can help you determine a suitable schedule for your pet’s age. The nutrition label on your dog’s food bag will provide you with general portion size guidance based on your Shichon’s weight. For more specific help, ask your veterinarian—they can make recommendations that take into account your dog’s age, weight, body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Keep in mind thatdog treatsadd up quickly, especially in small breeds like the Shichon. Be sure treats don’t make up more than 10% of your pup’s daily diet. Your Shichon can receive all of the nutrients they need from a dog food that meets the standards set by the AAFCO. However,nutritional supplementscan be used at the advice of your veterinarian to treat or prevent certain health conditions. Your vet may recommendjoint supplementsto help with patellar luxation or hip dysplasia, or evendental chewsto promote healthy teeth. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. Properly trained and socialized Shichons are every bit as sweet, playful, and gentle as they look. These canine social butterflies need close companionship to thrive, and can get along with all ages and species. Some of this one-on-one time can be spent in lap lounging, but Shichons also need daily play for mental and physical health. Shichons are a highly adaptable breed and makegreat family dogs. But if they don’t get enough attention or exercise, they may resort to unwanted behaviors likeexcessive barking. All dogs, including Shichon puppies, need to be socialized during their first 16 weeks of life. Socializing a puppyhelps ensure they will grow to be comfortable, confident, and well-behaved no matter what situation they’re in. Ask your Shichon breeder how they have approached socialization, and get tips from your vet on how to balance socialization and safety. Shichons are eager to learn and please when it comes to training. Consistentpositive reinforcement trainingis the best way to teach your pup while building the human-animal bond. Cuddling/lap lounging Neighborhood walks Indoor or outdoor playtime (fetch, tug-of-war, etc. ) Obedience training Learning new tricks The Shichon’s Shih Tzu parent has long, luxurious locks, while their Bichon parent boasts curly, long hair. Your Shichon’s coat may take after one parent or be a unique mix of the two. Regardless of your pup’s exact inheritance,  you can expect a low-shedding coat that needs daily upkeep. Good coat care is foundational to good skin care. Matted furcan trap moisture, debris, and other irritants next to your Shichon’s skin, causing irritation andinfections. To keep your dog’s skin healthy, it’s essential to keep their hair free from problems. Ask your veterinarianhow often you should bathe your dog. Keep in mind that bathing your Shichon dog too often can strip their skin of healthy oils, and lead todryness and itchiness. Human-grade shampoo can also dry out your dog’s skin and cause irritation, so only usedog-specific shampoo and conditioner. Expect your pup to require daily brushing and a trip to the groomer every month or two. Shorter haircuts can make your brushing duties easier. Because both parent breeds are prone to eye issues, it’s important to closely monitor your Shichon’s eyes for signs of problems, like cloudiness andinflammation. It’s also important to keep the hair around their eyes trimmed to avoid irritation. Shih Tzus and Bichons can also be prone totear staining. Regular rust-colored tear stains typically aren’t problematic and simply need to be cleaned with adog-safe wipe. Shih Tzu have floppy ears, and Bichons can have excessively hairy ears. Both of these traits can makeear infectionsa common problem. Ask your veterinarian how and how often you shouldclean your dog’s ears, and remember to keep ear hairs trimmed. If you seesigns of an ear infection(redness, odor, pain, itchiness), it’s time to visit the vet. Small dogs, such as Shichons, are at a higher risk for dental disease. To prevent this, brush your dog’s teeth every day using aveterinarian-approved dog toothbrush. Giving your Shichon dental chews,supplements, orwater additivescan also help promote dental health. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Shichon to your family: Do I have time to brush a dog’s coat and teeth every day? Am I financially prepared to provide professional grooming services every one to two months? Am I home enough to give a social dog enough companionship? Do I have time to provide a dog withmental stimulationand physical exercise every day? Do I have the skills, patience, and dedication to train a dog using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 18 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Shichon. All dogs bark, and Shichons often bark to alert their family. They also resort to barking out of boredom if they aren’t getting enough attention and exercise. Yes, Shichons are easy to love and accommodate, thanks to their small size and ability to befriend people of all ages. They can be a great option for first-time dog parents and apartment dwellers. Every dog is an individual and will take topotty trainingat a different rate. But Shichons are eager to please their families, so they may pick up potty training quicker than other breeds. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians