SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/welsh-terrier

Adobe_stock/Angel The Welsh Terrier is an affectionate breed that, thanks to their intelligence and eager-to-please nature, is easy to train. The breedoriginated in Walesand was bred to hunt pests, such as otters and badgers, for Welsh farmers. They resemble an Irish dog breed, theAiredale Terrier, but with notable differences. Namely, the Welsh Terrier is smaller; they stand about 15 inches tall and weigh around 20 pounds. Airedales are 23 inches tall on average and weigh 50–70 pounds. The Welsh Terrier has a rectangular head and almond-shaped brown eyes. Theirtail is commonly docked, though this is a controversial practice theAmerican Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA)advocates against. Thoughterrier breedshave a reputation for having an independent streak, Welsh Terriers are eager to please their family members. They are highly trainable and pick up cues quickly because of this. Welsh Terriers have a lot of energy and need to be given jobs to stay active and prevent boredom. They enjoy retrieving balls and running in a fenced backyard. Along, daily walkis also enjoyable for this breed. A professional grooming appointment is needed every two to three months to keep their coat short and tidy. While their coat does shed, it can be stripped by hand or by using a grooming knife. The Welsh Terrier is a healthy breed thattypically lives 12–15 years. However, this breed can be prone to a few musculoskeletal, eye, and neurologic conditions. Legg-Calve-Perthes diseasecan occur in Welsh Terrier puppies. This disease causes limping on one or both hind limbs due to a lack of blood supply in the top of the femur, which leads to bone decay. This condition is painful and requires orthopedic surgery. Hip dysplasiais an inherited orthopedic condition where the hip joint doesn’t properly align. This can cause pain and, over time,arthritis. Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hip joints. While rare, some Welsh Terriers are born with congenital hip dysplasia, while others can develop this condition during their senior years. Symptoms include: Lameness Slowness to rise from a lying position A “bunny-hopping” gait when running Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting up Hip dysplasia can often be managed withjoint supplementsand certain medications. In serious cases, surgical intervention may be required. Patellar luxationis when a dog’s kneecap moves (luxates) out of place. There are varying degrees of kneecap luxation, with the most severe requiring orthopedic surgery. A reputable Welsh Terrier breeder will have their dogs evaluated for patellar luxation and hip dysplasia to make sure only those without these medical conditions are used for breeding. Welsh terriers are prone to certain eye conditions, including cataracts, lens luxations, and glaucoma. Acataractoccurs when the eye lens becomes cloudy. The cataract’s size determines the degree of vision impairment, and surgery to remove the cataract may be needed to restore eyesight. Glaucomais an inherited eye disorder caused by increased pressure within the eye. This most often occurs in Welsh Terrier dogs under 3 years of age. Symptoms include excessive blinking,red eyes, bulging eyes,eye discharge, and blindness. Medications and surgery are often needed to manage glaucoma. Primary lens luxationis a painful genetic eye condition in which the lens is displaced. This can lead to glaucoma and blindness if surgical correction isn’t performed quickly. Canine atopic dermatitis (atopy)is an extremely itchy skin condition that Welsh Terriers are believed to be genetically predisposed to. It can be triggered byenvironmental allergens(such as pollen,fleas, dust mites, or mold) or by a food allergy, often due to the protein in the diet. Symptoms usually develop between 6 months and 3 years of age, so regular veterinary visits are important to monitor your dog’s skin health. Welsh Terriers with atopy areconstantly scratching,chewing, or licking themselves. This self-trauma leads to hair loss, thickened skin, and secondaryskin infections. Treatment often involves topical therapy or oral medication, a recovery cone, and a food trial to test for a food allergy. Primary epilepsyrefers toseizure activity in dogsthat may occur sporadically or frequently with no identified underlying cause. Symptoms usually develop at an early age (1–4 years) and may include: Unconsciousness Dilated pupils Full-body tremors Vocalization Urination or defecation Treatment involves one or more oral anti-seizure medications that must be given long-term to prevent seizures. Welsh Terriers should be fed a high-quality, small-breed dog food that meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Like all dogs, Welsh Terriers should always be fed a diet that matches their life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior). Your veterinarian can help youchoose the best food for your dog. Adult Welsh Terriers should be fed twice daily. In contrast, Welsh Terrier puppies need to eat more frequently—three or four times per day—to reduce risk forhypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Follow the feeding guidelines on your dog food packaging to learnhow much to feed your dogbased on their weight. Your vet can give further advice on the proper feeding amount based on your dog’s health, age, and lifestyle. Once your Welsh Terrier puppy is 1 year old, slowlytransition their puppy foodto a high-quality, small-breed adult formula. To prevent unwanted weight gain, adult food has fewer calories than puppy food. Welsh Terriers areprone to being overweight,so measure their food to avoid overfeeding. As with all dogs, your Welsh Terrier’s daily diet should consist of 90% dog food and only 10% treats. A healthy Welsh Terrier that’s fed an AAFCO-compliant dog food shouldn’t need anything additional. However, there are certain instances where a veterinarian may recommend one or moresupplements for your dog. For example, if your Welsh Terrier has canine atopic dermatitis, an omega-3 fatty acid supplement containing EPA and DHA can help reduce skin inflammation and promote a shiny, healthy coat. Welsh Terriers with joint issues, such as a patellar luxation or hip dysplasia, may benefit from a joint supplement and an omega-3 fatty acid supplement to reduce joint inflammation. The Welsh Terrier’s temperament is friendly and outgoing, according to theWelsh Terrier Club of America (WTCA). They can be good with young children and other dogs when properly socialized, and when introductions are supervised and done properly. Welsh Terriers also have a lot of energy and need at least one or two hours of exercise every day. This could be a long walk, abrisk run, or chasing a ball or Frisbee in the yard. They need a job to do to stay fit and stimulated, and to prevent obesity and boredom. True to their terrier nature,this Welsh dog breed barks a lot, and needs patience and positive reinforcement to curb unwanted behaviors. Early socializationandtraining classes with positive reinforcementare crucial at an early age to help keep your dog frombarking excessively. Proper training, includingstrong recall, is also important when your Welsh Terrier is outside. This breed has astrong prey drivebecause of their hunting history and may see smaller animals as something to chase. Always keep your Welsh Terrier on a leash or inside a fenced area when outside. Welsh Terriers are usually easy to train because they are smart and eager to please their family members. They respond well to positive reinforcement, such as receiving praise and treats when they behave properly. Welsh Terrier puppies should be enrolled in socialization, obedience, and puppy training classes before they’re 16 weeks old. These classes will help them learn cues and become comfortable around new stimuli (like children, other dogs, and strangers). Long walks Running or jogging Frisbee Chasing a ball Barn hunt The Welsh Terrier has a double coat of medium length fur:a wiry and harsh outer coat over a smooth, soft undercoat. Professional grooming appointments can help keep their coat at a manageable length and minimize shedding during certain times of the year. A Welsh Terrier should bebathed every two to three monthswith a moisturizing shampoo. Because this breed can develop allergy-related skin issues, monitor their skin and contact your veterinarian if you notice changes such as redness, moisture, or crust. The Welsh Terrier’s coat sheds two to three times a year. During these times, the dead or loose hairs can be hand-stripped (a process that removes hair by the root instead of trimming the fur). Aside from stripping, pet parents must brush their Welsh Terrier’s coat at least once or twice a weekto prevent matting. Welsh Terriers are prone to several eye disorders. When researching a Welsh Terrier breeder, work with one who has their breeding dogs examined and tested for various eye disorders. After bringing home your pup, schedule a wellness exam to have a veterinarian look at their eyes. If you notice a change in your dog’s eyes or suspect vision loss, schedule a vet appointment as soon as possible. Welsh Terriers are not as prone to frequentear infectionsas some other dog breeds. However, they can occasionally develop infections, especially if they have allergies or get water in their ears during a bath. Cleaning their earswith avet-recommended ear cleanercan help minimize ear infections. It’s also important to clean their ears after a bath or other water activity, such asswimming. If your dog has allergies, ask your veterinarian how often you should clean their ears to reduce the risk of infection. Welsh Terriers have a lot of energy—and it’s a pet parent’s job to make sure they release that energy every day. The ideal home for this breed would have a large, fenced backyard where a Welsh Terrier can run around after a ball. While they can live in an apartment, they would need to be taken out for long walks or runs every day to prevent unwanted weight gain and boredom. Remember that this breed was bred to hunt and may still retain a strong prey drive. If you have a cat,introduce them to your Welsh Terrier slowlyand under supervision. This dog must be supervised, and either be on a leash or inside a fenced yard when outside so they don’t chase neighborhood wildlife. When well-exercised, well-trained, and well-socialized, Welsh Terriers can make a great family dog. Welsh Terriers can be great pets with the proper training and socialization, and when their daily exercise needs are met. Every dog is an individual, but Welsh Terriers are known to bark a lot to seek attention and alert their family. Training at a young age is key to helping prevent unwanted barking. A Welsh Terrier’s coat sheds two to three times a year, and they need to be brushed or hand-stripped during this time to remove dead and loose hairs. If a Welsh Terrier is trained to return quickly when called, they can be off leash. But be cautious, as this breed has a strong prey drive and may chase a small wild animal if it’s in eyesight. Although their coat colors and texture are similar, there are differences between Welsh Terriers and Airedale Terriers. The Welsh Terrier is about 8 inches shorter and 30–50 pounds lighter than the Airedale. Welsh Terriers also have a slightly longer life expectancy than Airedales, on average. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians