SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/labrador-retriever

Adobe_stock/Parilov The Labrador Retriever is one of themost popular dog breeds in the U. Labs are medium- to large-breed sporting dogs who are active and friendly, making themgreat family dogs. Labrador Retrievers weigh 55–80 pounds on average, with females on the lower end of this range. Typically, their height is 21–25 inches. They have a wide skull and nose, deep chest, strong tail, and muscular build. Labs come in three colors: yellow, black, and chocolate. Labradors tend to be highly affectionate toward people, even strangers, and do exceptionally well with other dogs and with children. However, supervision is still important when first introducing a Lab to family members. Labrador Retrievers have a double coat that repels water. Due to this double coat, they shed a lot, and frequent brushing to manage the shedding is required. Labrador Retrievers love water—in fact, the breed got their start working alongside fishermen, according toThe Labrador Retriever Club. Today, they are great companions for active families who like to spend a lot of time outdoorsswimming,hiking, orhunting. The average Labrador Retriever lifespan is 11–13 years. They are a relativelyhealthy breed, but there are some potential health issues pet parents should be aware of. Labrador Retrievers are prone toear infectionsfor a few reasons: They have ears that hang down, which can trap moisture and wax. This may lead to inflammation and infection within the ear canal. Most Labrador Retrieverdogs love swimming, but water that gets in their ears can lead to an ear infection. Labs areprone to allergies, which increases their chances of developing an ear infection. Symptoms of an ear infection can include: Redness of the ear canal Brown or yellow debris in the ear canal Head shaking Head tilt Rubbing ears on carpet/furniture Odor in ears Scratching at ears To minimize the risk of ear infections in Labrador Retrievers, clean their ears with avet-recommended ear cleanerthat contains a drying agent, such asEpi-Otic Advanced. Do this every two to three weeks for maintenance, and also after swimming or a bath, unless your vet recommends a different schedule. The tricuspid valve controls blood flow on the right side of the heart from the right atrium into the right ventricle. Labrador Retrievers withtricuspid valve dysplasia (TVD)have a valve that doesn’t function properly and allows blood to leak backward into the right atrium. Over time, the right atrium and right ventricle can become enlarged, and dogs may develop heart failure. Labrador Retrievers with TVD may have aheart murmurthat can be heard during a routine physical exam. Though some can be asymptomatic, signs of right-sided heart failure include: Coughing Fluid in the abdomen Distended abdomen Difficulty breathing Rapid heart rate Heart medications are often prescribed to manage this condition. The prognosis can vary based on the severity of the disease. Some Labradors with TVD can live a normal lifespan. Elbow dysplasiais when the elbow joint doesn’t develop correctly, causing it to be looser than normal. This ultimately leads to degenerative joint disease (DJD) within the elbow. Elbow dysplasia can occur in one or both elbows, and the condition is often diagnosed viaX-raysor advanced imaging (CT scans). Treatment depends on the dysplasia’s severity. Hip dysplasiais an inherited orthopedic condition where the head of the femur doesn’t sit snugly in the hip joint. As a result, the bone rubs against the hip socket, leading toarthritis. Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hip joints. Symptoms include: Lameness Slowness to rise from a lying-down position Bunny-hopping gait when running Reluctance to run, jump, or go up stairs Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting Like with elbow dysplasia, treating hip dysplasia varies depending on the severity. In some cases, it can be managed throughjoint supplements, medications, andphysical therapy. In other cases, a dog may undergosurgery to correct hip dysplasia. Centronuclear myopathy(CNM) is a rare congenital disease that affects the skeletal muscle. Signs include an abnormal gait and difficulties exercising. The dog's muscles become weak and atrophied. Usually, symptoms first arise in Labrador Retriever puppies 2–5 months old. The condition tends to become stable (meaning it won’t continue to worsen) after 1 year of age. Dog DNA testingis available to determine if a puppy carries the genetic mutation for CNM. Reputable Labrador Retriever breeders will have their dogs tested before breeding. Exercise-induced collapse (EIC)is an inherited neuromuscular disease that first affects the hind limbs. A Labrador Retriever with EIC will have episodes of decreased muscle tone in the hind legs after exercise or excitement. The legs will suddenly become weak, which can lead to a lack of coordination when walking and even collapse. Dogs usually recover but can have more episodes of EIC later on. During an episode, adog’s temperaturecan become dangerously high. Labrador Retrievers with EIC usually start having episodes around 1 year of age. Your veterinarian can help you determine the best action plan if your dog experiences EIC. ADNA testcan be done to detect whether a Labrador Retriever puppy carries the genetic mutation and is at risk for EIC. Dogs that have the genetic mutation should not be bred. Hemangiosarcoma (HAS)is an aggressive form ofcancer in dogsthat most often originates in the spleen or heart. It forms a blood-filled tumor that can rupture at any time, causing a dog to bleed internally, which is life-threatening. Some clinical signs include: Weakness Pale gums Fluid in the abdomen Lack of appetite Difficulty breathing Hemangiosarcoma can spread quickly to other areas of the body and at first may be hard to detect with imaging (X-rays, ultrasound, or CT/MRI). Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a disease of the eye. The retina slowly degenerates over time, leading toblindness. PRA can be diagnosed with an eye exam. It usually develops in Labrador Retrievers between 3 and 9 years old. There is no cure for PRA, but blind dogs can live long and happy lives with the help of their pet parents. Labrador Retriever puppies should be fed ahigh-quality puppy foodmade for large breeds until they are 1 year old. Once they reach adulthood, they need totransition to a high-quality adult food. Make sure that whichever dog food you choose meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Some brands, such asRoyal Canin, make Labrador-specific dog food that’s scientifically formulated to meet the breed’s nutritional needs. Adult Labrador Retrievers do best with twice-daily feedings, morning and evening. Puppies should generally eat three to four times a day. This breed loves to eat and are known to eat very quickly. If you notice your dog gobbling food down, consider aslow-feeder bowl. This will regulate the amount of food your dog can eat at one time and prevent stomach upset that can happen if they eat too quickly. Labrador Retriever puppies have rapid growth spurts, so feed them ahigh-quality large breed puppy fooduntil they are under 12 months of age. Puppy food provides the extra calories and nutrients they need to grow to their full potential. Follow the feeding guidelines on the back of the bag based on age and expected body weight. Once your Labrador Retriever is 1 year old, switch to a high-quality adult formula—which has fewer calories than the puppy version—to preventunwanted weight gain. Todetermine how much to feed your dog, check the feeding guidelines on the bag. You can also chat with your veterinarian to find the appropriate portions to help keep your dog at ahealthy weight. Dogs eating an AAFCO-compliant diet should receive all necessary nutrients and won’t need extra supplementation. However, Labradors with certain health considerations may benefit fromdog supplementsin their diet. For example, supplements likeNutramax DasuquinandCosequincan help a Labrador Retriever that has hip or elbow dysplasia and possibly slow the onset of arthritis. Fish oil supplementscan also help reduce joint inflammation while promoting coat and skin health. Never give your dog a supplement without speaking to your veterinarian first. The Labrador Retriever temperament is part of what makes them such a popular pet. They are typically affectionate toward children, other pets, and even strangers. Though Labradors get along with nearly anyone, theirhigh energyand strong tails can be dangerous for toddlers and other young children who can get accidentally knocked over. Always supervise playtime between kids and dogs of any breed. Labrador Retrievers are prone toeating things that they shouldn’t—especially as puppies. They may try to eat socks, shoes, furniture, and other items, or get into the trash. Pet parents must keep a watchful eye on Lab puppies and dedicate time to train them on what they can and cannot eat. Thesefriendly dogsalso love to play and remain highly energetic throughout most of their lives. They need lots of exercise and attention to make them happy. Generally, Labrador Retrievers need at least an hour of exercise every day, though this varies based on your dog’s age and health. Labrador Retriever puppies are very energetic and will grow into athletic dogs. It’s important to take the time to train them correctly when they’re young. It is highly recommended that Labrador Retriever puppies participate in puppy training and obedience classes. They need to besocialized with different environments, people, and petsso they get used to being around others at a young age. Be sure to quickly work on any bad puppy behaviors that arise—such asbiting,chewing on objects, and trying to eat random items—so these behaviors don’t continue and worsen over time. Labrador Retrievers are smart and eager to please. Because of this, they often go through specialized training to becomeservice dogsor participate in search and rescue. They also make greattherapy dogs. Scent work Tracking Agility Obedience training Dock diving Swimming Hiking Playing fetch Running Labrador Retrievers don’t require a lot of grooming, but they do shed a lot. Deshedding andbrushing your dogwill be important parts of your grooming routine. Healthy Labrador Retrievers do not require any specialized skin care, but it’s important to ensure that they are fully dried after swimming and baths to help preventskin infections. Talk to your vet if you notice any changes in your dog’s skin. Labrador Retrievers have a thick double coat that is water-repellent. Due to this double coat, Labrador Retrievers shed a lot. Brush them two to three times each week with a deshedding brush like aFURminator brushto manage the hair. But even with regular brushing, you should expect loose hair in your home. Labradors also need an occasional bath to keep their skin and coat clean. Ask your vethow often you should bathe your dog, and always use adog-friendly shampoo. Take note of any changes in your pup’s eyes or vision. Talk to your vet if you notice anything out of the ordinary. Labrador Retrievers are prone to ear infections. It’s helpful to routinely clean their ears every two to three weeks with an ear cleaner that contains a drying agent, as well as after baths and swimming, to minimize the risk of ear infections. Brush your dog’s teethevery day with avet-recommended dog toothbrush and toothpaste. This is the best way to preventdental disease in dogs. You can also prioritize oral care withdental chewsand by keeping up with regularveterinary dental cleanings. Labrador Retrievers make great family dogs. They are energetic, friendly, and love to go on adventures with their family. However, Labs need to be in an active family that will take time to play and exercise this high-energy breed. A bored Labrador can become unhappy and destructive, so make sure your dog gets at least an hour of exercise every day. The Labrador Retriever is also a high-shedding dog breed. These dogs will need consistent brushing to keep their shedding under control, but be aware that dog hair will have a permanent presence in your home. But if you’re fine with these considerations, a Lab makes a friendly, loyal companion. Yes, Labrador Retrievers make excellent family dogs, as they are affectionate and have the patience and tolerance to do well around other dogs and children. Yes, Labrador Retrievers are considered to be one of thesmartest dog breeds. There are three Labrador Retriever colors: yellow, black, and chocolate. The typical Labrador Retriever lifespan is 11–13 years. Labrador Retrievers andGolden Retrieverslook similar, but with somenoticeable differences. While there are yellow, chocolate, and black Labrador Retrievers, Golden Retrievers all have a coat that’s a shade of gold. A Labrador’s coat is also shorter than a Golden Retriever’s. Yes, Labrador Retrievers shed year-round and even more heavily once or twice a year. Labrador Retrievers need at least an hour of exercise every day and shed heavily. These two components make some people label them “high maintenance. ” WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians