SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/maltese

Istock/enviromantic The Maltese is asmall dog breedthat’s best known for their luxurious, floor-length white coat and playful personality. These dogs originated on the Mediterranean island of Malta and have been loyal companions for centuries, with references to the breed found in Ancient Greek and Roman literature. Today, these tinywhite dogsare highly adaptable and make charming and devoted companions. The Maltese dog breed has a lot of perks: The dogs are small, friendly, and generally healthy. Their white coat also gives them the label of“hypoallergenic” dog, though there is no such thing as a totally allergen-free pup. But that long and silky coat also requires near-daily upkeep to keep in top shape, so block off time on your calendar for grooming. Along with grooming, socializing and training are also commitments pet parents must make when bringing home a Maltese puppy. These pint-sized pups have a big personality and needpositive reinforcement, exercise, andmental stimulationevery day. The average Maltese lifespan is 12–15 years. They are a generally healthy breed with few health concerns, but there are a few inherited conditions pet parents need to be aware of for health management. Maltese can developluxating patellas, an inherited condition where one or both of the kneecaps pop in and out of place. Although patellar luxation is not generally considered a painful condition, it may cause the dog to favor one leg and can predispose them to other knee injuries (such as acranial cruciate ligament tear) andarthritis. Depending on the severity of the luxating patella, surgery may be recommended to prevent further injury and improve your Maltese’s quality of life. Responsible Maltese breeders will screen their puppies for heart abnormalities such aspatent ductus arteriosus. PDA is an inherited condition where the ductus arteriosus (the normal opening between the two major blood vessels in the heart that closes shortly after birth) does not close. This condition causes blood to flow improperly and forces the left side of the heart to work harder, eventually leading toheart failure. Depending on the size of the opening, dogs may show minimal symptoms to severe signs of heart failure such as: Difficulty breathing Exercise intolerance Stunted growth Surgery is typically the best option to close the defect. When done before the heart begins to fail, dogs generally have a good prognosis. Some dogs that have already developed heart failure at the time of surgery may require medications afterward. Maltese puppies should also be screened for congenital liver issues, such as shunts. Liver shuntsare abnormal veins that bypass the liver. This bypasses the normal filtration of toxins, wastes, and medications from the blood. Dogs with liver shunts may have stunted growth and neurologic signs such as disorientation orseizures. Liver shunts can be screened with a blood test and are often managed with a diet change and medication, though sometimes surgery is required. Like all other toy breeds, Maltese dogs are at a heightened risk ofperiodontal disease, or dental disease. This can lead tobad breath, red and inflamed gums, loose teeth, and other symptoms that can be painful for your Maltese. When left untreated, dental disease can even damage a dog’s organs. The best way to keep your dog’s mouth healthy is withdaily at-home tooth brushingand routinedental cleanings under anesthesia. Selecting the best diet for a Maltese is based on the needs of the individual dog. While it’s always important to choose a diet with high-quality ingredients, it’s best to discuss diet with your veterinarian. A vet can make a recommendation based on your dog’s specific medical history. The dog food you choose must meet the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). There are even some breed-specific dog foods designed for Maltese; ask your veterinarian if these are good options for your dog. Due to their tiny size, young Maltese puppies can be susceptible tohypoglycemia (low blood sugar)if they don’t eat enough food throughout the day. This can be avoided by feeding your puppy small meals three to four times a day until they are around 4 months old. At this age, their bodies are better suited to regulate glucose levels, and they can transition to two (or three, if desired) meals a day. Adult Maltese typically do well with two meals a day, in the morning and evening. Maltese dogs can beprone to obesity. Avoid overfeeding your pup so they can maintain a healthy weight andbody condition score. Just like when choosing the right food,how much you feed your dogvaries by individual. Follow the instructions on your dog food packaging—this provides portion guidance based on your dog’s weight. If you have any questions, ask your veterinarian. They can refine the dog food packaging’s recommendations based on your specific dog’s lifestyle and health. For Maltese dogs that have luxating patella, it may be beneficial to offer them ajoint supplementwithglucosamineand chondroitin. Additionally,omega-3 supplements (fish oil)can help protect joint health and keep their skin and coat lush and soft. Always talk to your veterinarian beforegiving your dog a supplement. While every pup is an individual, the typical Maltese dog’s temperament is affectionate and friendly. They makegood family dogsbut interactions between them and young children must be supervised, as rambunctious children may accidentally hurt this tiny dog. A family with olderchildren who understand how to interact with a dogmay be better suited for a Maltese. Maltese dogs form close bonds to their family and prefer to always be by your side. This breed candevelop separation anxietywhen left alone for too long. Like all dogs, Maltese do well with daily activity, but they don’t require vigorous exercise to maintain their physical or mental health. They’ll enjoytaking a walkaround the neighborhood, playing in the backyard or living room, and learning new ticks. A Maltese that’s allowed to grow bored or become lonely may turn to unwanted behaviors such asexcessive barking. Maltese aresmart dogsthat can pick up training cues quickly when positive reinforcement is used. Keep training sessions short and fun, like a game, to keep your dog’s attention. Be mindful of how many treats you’re feeding your Maltese during training sessions, as calories can quickly add up for these tiny dogs. You can use praise and toys as positive reinforcement as well. Walking Indoor/outdoor playing Obedience Agility Learning tricks Maltese are known for their long and silky white coat that requires daily care toprevent mats and tangles. Their fur should bebrushed or combed every day, andregular bathingwill keep their skin and coat healthy and clean. If you want a lighter grooming regimen, there are many shorter Maltese haircuts you can choose from. Skin care for the Maltese can vary depending on the individual’s needs. However, this breed does not typically have sensitive skin. Regular brushing and bathing with adog-friendly shampooto maintain their coat is the best way to keep their skin healthy. Contact your veterinarian if you notice any changes in your dog’s skin. The Maltese’s long coat is prone to matting, which can causeskin infectionsif not cared for properly. Daily brushing is required to prevent their fur from matting or tangling. When bathing a Maltese, it’s important to thoroughly rinse and then dry the hair to prevent skin irritation or infection from the shampoo and moisture. Their white coat can predispose the Maltese totear staining, but routine cleaning with avet-recommended tear stain removerwill help keep this to a minimum. Excessive staining or othereye dischargecould be a sign of other underlying conditions should be discussed with a veterinarian. Routine ear cleaningwith aveterinary-approved ear cleaneris important for maintaining healthy ear canals and preventingear infections. Ear-cleaning should also be done any time a Maltese is in water, such as afterswimmingor bathing. Pet parents need to pay special care to their dog's mouth because Maltese are prone to dental disease. Brushing their teeth every day using a dog-safe toothpaste and toothbrush is the best way to keep their teeth clean and healthy. It can also help to give yourdog dental chews. The silky white coat of a Maltese dog is often a major draw for new pet parents, but this breed will do best in a home that’s able to provide daily maintenance of that coat. They need to be brushed every day and have routine baths. If you keep your dog’s coat trimmed short, you need to have the budget for consistent groomer appointments. But those who are ready to meet their grooming needs will find a friendly, playful, and loving companion in the Maltese. Though energetic, the breed doesn’t require a lot of exercise, which can make them well-suited for busier families. Their tiny stature makes the rambunctious nature of young children somewhat intimidating for the Maltese, but they’ll fit right in with families that have older kids. All dogs shed, but Maltese tend to shed very minimally. All dogs produce allergens from their coat, dander, urine, and saliva. But because of their low-shedding coat, a Maltese can be a good fit for some people who experience dog allergies. Before bringing home a Maltese puppy, spend time with the breed first to see how your allergies react. Yes, Maltese are very affectionate and loving toward their families. They do well with children who know how to interact properly with small animals, but they may be best suited for a family with older kids who are always gentle. The typical Maltese lifespan is 12–15 years. Depending on the breeder’s experience and the puppy’s pedigree, the typical Maltese dog price can range from $600–$2,000. You can also find more affordable dogs for adoption atMaltese rescue organizations. Maltese dogs weigh under 7 pounds and stand 7–9 inches tall. Maltese dogs are already very small, and breeders who try to create smaller versions often don’t have the dogs’ health in mind. Avoid working with breeders who advertiseteacup puppies. Teresa Kho-Pelfrey graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2015 and completed her clinical year at Purdue. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians