SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/gordon-setter

Zack Newman Adobe_stock/DragoNika Gordon Setters trace their roots to 1820s Scotland, where they were bred to hunt birds such as  pheasants and quails. The dogs get their name from Duke Alexander Gordon, who established the breed. Today, Gordon Setters are still used ashunting dogs, but they also serve as devoted and lively companion pets. They have a black and tan coat, stand 23–27 inches tall, and weigh between 45–80 pounds. The Gordon Setter breed is alert and loyal toward their family, but they may be wary around strangers at first. Though bred to be a hunter, they can thrive in any outdoorsy family and enjoy activities likehiking. Gordons need at least an hour of exercise every day. That said, it’s important to remember that your Gordon Setter can have strong hunting instincts and may follow their nose into trouble, according to theGordon Setter Club of America (GSCA). Theirprey drivemight lead them to chase neighborhood birds, so always keep your Gordon Setter dog on a leash or inside a securely fenced area. When they’re not romping around outside, the breed loves staying close to their family at home. The Gordon Setter is a generallyhealthy dog breedwith anaverage lifespan of 12–13 years. However, like many breeds, they are prone to a few genetic problems that could be costly. Pet parents may want toinvest in pet insurancewhen bringing home a Gordon Setter puppy. Gastric dilatation-volvulusis a severe form ofbloat in dogsthat affects deep-chested breeds, including the Gordon Setter. This is a life-threatening condition in which the stomach fills with gas and twists, cutting off blood flow. Warning signs include: Vomiting without producing anything (retching) Swollen and distended abdomen Excessive drooling Inability to settle Pacing, restlessness Lack of appetite Families with Gordon Setters need to be aware of the signs of GDV and take their dog to an emergency veterinarian immediately if they observe any of these symptoms. GDV may be avoided with agastropexy procedure. Hip dysplasiais a condition where the hip joints become loose, which can cause pain and eventually lead toarthritis. Warning signs include an inability to get in and out of cars, limping, and lameness. Treatment varies depending on the hip dysplasia’s severity but can include weight management,joint supplements, or surgery. Progressive retinal atrophyis a genetic condition where the rods and cones of the eye break down, leading to blindness. There is no treatment, butblind dogscan live long and happy lives with the proper care. Reputable Gordon Setter breeders will test their dogs for this condition. Hypothyroidismhappens when a dog’s body doesn’t produce enough thyroid hormone. Signs of hypothyroidism include: Weight gain despite no changes in diet or exercise Lethargy Poor coat condition (dry, brittle fur) Heat-seeking behavior Increasedskin infectionsandear infections Talk to your vet if you notice any of these symptoms in your Gordon Setter. Dogs with hypothyroidism can live long, happy lives with lifelong medical treatment. Tochoose the best dog foodfor a Gordon Setter, consider your pup’s health, age, and lifestyle. Younger and more active Gordon Setters have different needs than their senior counterparts. Talk to your veterinarian about the best food for your dog. Selecting a food approved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)is a good place to start. Gordon Setter puppies need toeat a puppy-specific foodbefore transitioning to an adult diet. Because Gordon Setters are prone to bloat, pet parents should take some precautions when feeding their dog: Restrict exercise an hour before and after mealtimes Avoid using raised food bowls Useslow-feeder bowls Feed multiple smaller meals throughout the day instead of one big meal There is no across-the-board recommendation on how much to feed your dog. Instead, work with your veterinarian to determine portions that consider your dog’s age, health, and lifestyle. Your AAFCO-compliant dog food will also provide guidance on feeding, based on your dog’s weight. This is a good recommendation to begin with until you can talk to your vet. A dog receives all necessary nutrition through their AAFCO-compliant dog food. However, sometimes yourvet will recommend supplementsdepending on your pup’s health. Gordon Setter dogs may benefit from joint supplements,probiotics, or omega-3 fatty acids (fish oil). Never give your dog a supplement without speaking to your veterinarian first. Gordon Setters are full of energy; they need regular exercise andmental stimulationto keep them happy. Thesefriendly dogscan be great with children, according to the breed club, especially when they’re introduced to children during puppyhood. Remember that every interaction between kids and dogs should be supervised, and children must betaught how to appropriately interact with dogs. Though they have lots of energy outside, Gordon Setters are known to becalm dogsat home. While they willbark to alert their familyor to get attention (the breed club calls them “great talkers”), this breed isn’t known to be overly vocal. However, Gordon Setters maybark excessively—and become destructive—if they’re allowed to grow bored. All dogs, including the Gordon Setter breed, need obedience training as puppies. Usepositive reinforcement methodslike praise and treats to teach them basics like “sit” and “come. ” Recall training is especially important for Gordon Setters due to their high prey drive. Gordon Setterpuppies need socializationto grow into confident adults. Expose your puppy to new people, animals, environments, and sounds early and consistently so they become comfortable in new situations. Hunting Running Long walks Hide and seek Obedience Agility Flyball Hiking Because of their long, feathered, black-and-tan coat, Gordon Setters require weekly grooming to stay free of tangles. Some Gordon Setters developitchy skin due to seasonal allergies. Talk to your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s skin (such as redness orflaking) or if they seemexcessively itchy. Your vet can help devise a treatment plan. Expect to brush your Gordon Setter every week to keep tangles at bay, as this breed isprone to mattingand needs an attentive at-home grooming routine. Pay special care to the fur between the toes, which needs to be properly trimmed,according to the GSCA. A Gordon Setter dog’s eyes must be checked by a veterinarian during theirannual wellness examsfor signs of PRA orcataracts. Gordon Setters have long, floppy ears that hang on either side of their face. Because of this, moisture and debris can easily become trapped in the ear canal and cause infections. Clean your Gordon Setter’s earsregularly; ask your vet how often to do this. You must also clean their ears every time your dog has been in water, such as afterswimmingor a bath. Always use aveterinarian-recommended ear cleaner for dogs. The perfect home for a Gordon Setter is with an active and outdoorsy family. The breed needs robust exercise to expend their vast energy stores. This is also avery smart dog, and pet parents should be ready to exercise their dog’s mind as well as their body. Positive training and consistent socialization are important to start on day one with this breed. Along with exercise and training, pet parents need to dedicate time to brushing their Gordon Setter at least once a week. Gordon Setters can make excellent pets because of their friendly demeanor, loyalty, and gentleness around children. Gordon Setters do bark, but they don’t have a reputation for barking excessively for no reason. Yes, Gordon Setters are rare, and it can be difficult to find a puppy. However, the breed has grown in popularity in recent years and ranks as theAKC’s 99th most popular dog breed. Gordon Setters typically stand 23–27 inches tall and weigh 45–80 pounds. Females are usually smaller than males. The Gordon Setter price is anywhere from $1,000 to $2,000 depending on breeder, bloodline, and location. Gordon Setters share similarities toIrish Setters, but they are separate breeds with distinct differences. Irish Setters have a deep red coat, while Gordon Setters have black and tan fur. Irish Setters were developed in Ireland, while Gordon Setters hail from Scotland. WRITTEN BY Zack Newman Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians