SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/chow-chow

Istock/Iurii The Chow Chow is one of the oldest dog breeds, according to theChow Chow Club. Historians have pinpointed the Chow Chow’s origins to China’s Han Dynasty (206 BCE to 220 CE). They later gained popularity in Europe and, eventually, the U. While the exact origins of the breed are unclear, Chow Chows (often simply called “Chows”) have performed many jobs over the years, including guarding, cart-pulling,hunting, and serving as companions. A member of the non-sporting breed group, a Chow dog is easy to pick out from the pack thanks to their squished face, droopy eyes,fluffy coat, and characteristic blue Chow Chow tongue. A Chow Chow, full-grown, stands 17–20 inches tall and weighs 45–70 pounds. With aflat face, fluffy fur, and curled tail, the Chow Chow’s appearance invites cuddles and affection. However, this regal breed would prefer if their space was respected. A Chow Chow’s temperament might be aloof and wary of new people and other pets. But with early socialization, they can be more welcoming. Chows are alsointelligentand strong-willed, traits that don’t make them ideal dogs for first-time pet parents. But they are loyal to those they love, and their adaptability can make them wonderful companions. With diligent socialization and training, Chow Chows can be good family dogs. Chow Chows tend to do better in families where children are older. They typically have one person at home who’s their favorite, but they will watch after the entire family. Chow Chows have thick double coats that shed moderately year-round and more heavily in the spring and fall. Frequent brushing is a must to reduce shedding andprevent matting. Chow Chows are not consideredhypoallergenic dogsdue to their heavy shedding. The independently minded Chow Chow is smart and loyal to their humans. When in a family unit, a Chow dog will typically have one person they are especially close with. However, they are not known to be cuddly dogs and appreciate when their space and boundaries are respected. If they want attention, they’ll let you know. Remember that adog’s breed only influences about 9% of their behavior, and every Chow Chow is an individual. Chow Chows are more likely to overheat because of their thick coats and short snout, so short spurts of exercise are better for them. A couple of 20-minute walks every day is enough. In addition to physical activity, Chow Chows requiremental stimulationto help keep them engaged in activities. In general, Chow Chows are typicallyreserved around strangers. This makes it important for pet parents to properlysocialize their Chow Chow puppyfrom an early age so your dog grows to be calm and confident around new people, new animals, and in new situations. Every dog is an individual, but a Chow Chow might prefer being the only pet at home. They’re a reserved breed that likes their personal space. But if your Chow Chow puppy is raised with other animals, they can live well together. Chow Chows are smart dogs, which means they’re susceptible to boredom. To help make training successful, keep sessions short and creative. Training requires patience andconsistent positive reinforcement. Talk to your breeder about how they have approached socializing their Chow Chow puppies, as the best time to socialize a dog is when they’re 3–12 weeks old. Thebreed club recommends specific tipsfor socializing your Chow puppy, including: Picking up your puppy often and talking to him quietly Encourage friends your Chow puppy hasn’t met to come over and pick them up Expose your puppy to new sounds, including the TV and radio Take your puppy with you on car rides Introduce your Chow Chow puppy to as many new people as possible When training, always use positive reinforcement liketraining treats,dog toys, and praise. Fetch Hide and hunt Treibball Walks Obedience training When considering adding a Chow Chow puppy to your family, it may be beneficial toconsider pet insuranceand budget for any medical issues that arise. There are many diseases that are more likely to occur in the breed, and a Chow’slifespan is shorter than some other dog breeds, at eight to 12 years. Hip dysplasiais caused by the hip joint developing incorrectly, which can lead to gait abnormalities, pain, andarthritis. This condition is common in large dogs, including Chow Chows. Depending on the severity, hip dysplasia can be managed with pain medication or with surgery. Similar to hip dysplasia,elbow dysplasiais typically seen in younger dogs when the elbow doesn’t develop properly. And, again like hip dysplasia, elbow dysplasia can cause arthritis as the dog ages. Talk to your veterinarian if you notice your Chow dog limping on one or both forearms, walking with an abnormal gait, or if their elbow bulges to one side. Treating elbow dysplasia depends on its severity, but it can require surgery. Another joint condition,patellar luxationis when the knee joint slips out of its normal position. Telltale signs include a bunny-hopping gait or a limp that comes and goes. As with elbow and hip dysplasia, the treatment for patellar luxation ranges from pain management to surgery depending on its severity. Hypothyroidism in dogsis a disorder in which the thyroid glands don’t produce enough thyroid hormone. This can lead to symptoms including: Lethargy Weight gain Heat-seeking behavior Dry, brittle coat There is no cure for hypothyroidism, but dogs can live a long and happy life with lifelong medical care. Diabetesis a condition in which a dog is unable to control their blood sugar levels, resulting inweight loss, lethargy,increased drinkingandurination, anddehydration. Older Chow Chow dogs andthose that are obesehave a higher chance of developing diabetes. Affected dogs will needlifelong insulin injectionsand diet changes. Chow Chows can develop a number of issues with their eyes, including: Cataracts,when the dog’s eye lens become opaque (cloudy). Chow Chows can have a genetic predisposition for cataract development, but cataracts can also be secondary to diabetes. Entropionis a common eye problem in dogs when the eyelid rolls inward. The eyelashes then rub against the eye’s surface, causing irritation and damage. Distichiasisis a second eye disorder Chow Chows can develop, where one or more rows of eyelashes grow toward the eye, causing irritation. Glaucomais increased pressure in the eye that can be painful andlead to blindness. Like with cataracts, this can be inherited or caused by diabetes. Stomach cancer(or gastric carcinoma) is not a commonly reported disease process in dogs—it’s actually less than 1% of all cancer diagnoses. ButChow Chows are at an increased risk, and it’s suspected that this condition has genetic origins. Some common clinical signs of stomach cancer include: Decreased appetite Vomiting Diarrhea Blood in stool Gastric dilatation-volvulusis a life-threatening form ofbloat in dogswhere the stomach fills with gas and rotates. This cuts off blood supply to vital organs, such as the spleen and stomach. GDV requires immediate emergency veterinary care. Take your dog to the vet right away if you notice any symptoms, including if your Chow: Is trying to vomit but not producing anything (retching) Is pacing Is unwilling to eat or drink Has a distended stomach Is drooling excessively The chance of GDV can be reduced with agastropexy procedureperformed on your Chow puppy. Talk to your veterinarian about whether this is a recommended preventative surgery for your dog. The Chow Chow’s laid-back lifestyle makes them more susceptible to obesity and the additional health issues associated with it, such as diabetes, glaucoma, and arthritis. Because of this, staying on top of your Chow’s nutrition is an important task for pet parents. These dogs need to eat awell-balanced dog foodthat is formulated for their life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior) and meetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)guidelines. Ask your vet what thebest dog foodis for your Chow Chow. They will recommend a diet based on your dog’s weight, lifestyle, and health. GDV can occur after a dog eats, so caution should be taken during your Chow’s meals. To reduce the risk of the dangerous condition: Feed your dog multiple meals per day, not one large meal. Adult Chow Chows should eat at least two meals per day, while Chowpuppies can eat three or four meals every day. Do not allow your dog to exercise directly before or after eating. Do not feed your dog from an elevated food bowl. These are thought to increase the risk of bloat and GDV. To slow your Chow Chow down during mealtimes, try feeding them with aslow-feeder bowl. Theamount you feed a Chow Chowdepends on your specific dog’s health and lifestyle. Following the feeding recommendations on the side of your dog food packaging will help reduce the likelihood of obesity in your Chow dog. Talk with your veterinarian as well, as they can give you more specific guidance tailored to your dog’s needs. Healthy dogs eating an AAFCO-compliant diet will receive all necessary nutrients from their dog food. But because Chow Chows are predisposed to many coat and joint issues, it may be a good idea to talk to your vet aboutsupplements for your dog. Joint supplementswith chondroitin and glucosamine can be beneficial to keep joints healthy, and omega fatty acids  (such asfish oil) have anti-inflammatory properties. Pet parents must be prepared to spend a few hours every week grooming your Chow dog. Regular bathingand grooming your Chow Chow may be needed to help maintain healthy skin. Never use a human shampoo on your Chow—instead, bathe them with ahigh-quality dog shampoo. Chow Chows must be brushed every other day toprevent mattingand control shedding. The breed club recommends using aMaster Grooming Tools® Greyhound comb. Chow Chows can develop a number of eye problems, so pet parents need to monitor their dog’s eyes for any changes. If your dog is squinting, hasgreen or yellow eye discharge, experiences swelling, or if there are significant changes to the eye, take them to a veterinarian as soon as possible for treatment. The long hair around your Chow dog’s face has the potential to get into the eye and cause irritation and infection. Regularly scheduled trips to a professional groomer can help remove some problem hairs from the face. While anydog can develop ear infections, they are less likely than their floppy-eared counterparts. After your dog gets wet (whether from a bath or aswim), it can be helpful to use anear drum-friendly, self-drying ear cleanerto remove water from the ear canal. Talk to your veterinarian about whichear cleaning products they recommendand thebest technique for ear cleaning. When looking for a Chow Chow puppy, it’s important to make sure the parent dogs have been genetically tested for hip, thyroid, knee, and eye problems, and that the results of these tests are recorded with theOrthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA)orPennHIPand Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF), respectively. If you are adopting a Chow Chow from a rescue or shelter, it’s unlikely that these pets have been registered, but always ask for all available health information on your dog. It’s also important that your new pet is examined by a veterinarian within the first two weeks after coming home to make sure they’re healthy. Along with caring for their health, pet parents must dedicate themselves to training, socializing, and grooming their Chow Chow. This can be a good family dog, but Chows also like their space and tend to be more independent. If you’re looking for a cuddly lap dog, look elsewhere. The Chow Chow puppy price can be $1,800–$3,000, depending on many different factors. The breed club has adirectory of Chow Chow breeders. Yes, Chow Chows are very intelligent. Their smarts mean they’re likely to get bored with training, so short (but fun!) training sessions can be helpful to keep them engaged. While you might not find a Chow Chow at the dog park, the breed is not considered rare. Chow Chows may not require as much activity as active breeds like theBorder Collie, but they are not lazy. They need a couple of 20-minute walks every day, but Chow Chows are not made for long, rigorous amounts of activity. All dogs bark, and Chow Chows are no exception. Thanks to their history as working dogs, Chow Chows may bark to alert their pet parents. Training can helpreduce nuisance barking. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I am from Washington, DC, and I wanted to be a veterinarian since watching my uncle on his farm at 8. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians