SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/wirehaired-pointing-griffon

The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon is most well-known for their role as ahunting bird dog. The Griff, as they’re sometimes called, aresmart dogsthat desire to please their family. They were bred in The Netherlands, but much of their development took place in France during the 1800s, according to theAmerican Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Association (AWPGA). While Wirehaired Pointing Griffons were created to assist in hunting (both on dry land and in the water), they also make affectionate family members. As amedium-size dog, Wirehaired Pointing Griffons stand 20–24 inches tall and weigh 35–70 pounds. They have a scruffy, wiry coat that comes in shades of gray and brown. Their coat doesn’t shed a lot and doesn’t require extensive grooming, though they’re not considered ahypoallergenic dog breed. Griffon dogs are eager to please and work hard in the field. At home, these pups will cuddle closely to their family. Wirehaired Pointing Griffons are intelligent and respond well topositive reinforcement training. They are an active breed that needs lots of exercise andmental stimulation. While there are a few health issues that pet parents should be aware of, the Wirehaired Pointing Griffon isgenerally a healthy breed. They have atypical lifespan of 12–15 years. Hip dysplasiais a genetic disease wherein the hip joint doesn’t conform properly and becomes too loose, which then causes the cartilage and bone to wear down. As the body attempts to stabilize the joint, degenerative joint disease andosteoarthritismay develop. Arthritis, in turn, leads to pain, limping, and difficulty rising. Maintaining a lean body conditionis important for preventing arthritis in Wirehaired Pointing Griffons. Many vets recommend low-intensity exercise andjoint supplementscontaining omega-3 fatty acids, glucosamine, and chondroitin for dogs diagnosed with hip dysplasia. When pain is present,non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)are frequently prescribed to reduce inflammation and pain. If the pain from hip dysplasia cannot be managed, your vet may recommend surgery. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a group of diseases that causes the photoreceptor cells (rods and cones) on the retina (the eye’s light-sensitive layer) to break down. Initially, the dog may have difficulty seeing in the dark. Over time, the dog will become blind. PRA is an inherited disease in most cases, and there are currently no effective treatments. Cataractsoccur more frequently in Wirehaired Pointing Griffons than in many other dog breeds. In most cases, the condition develops in older dogs as proteins and fibers in the lens of the eye break down, causing thelens to become cloudy. This leads to blurred vision, which can progress to blindness. This is an inherited condition in most cases, but cataracts can also be seen withdiabetes mellitusor after an injury to the lens. In some cases, cataracts cause inflammation and discomfort that requires medication. There are no effective medications to slow their progression or prevent vision loss. But cataracts can be surgically removed by a board-certified veterinary ophthalmologist, and the procedure usually restores vision. Gastric dilatation-volvulus(a severe form ofbloat in dogs) is a condition that occurs suddenly and requires immediate life-saving intervention. GDV occurs when the stomach fills with food or gas, causing expansion and increased pressure. The stomach can then rotate, which causes inadequate blood supply to the organ. If not treated quickly, shock, tissue damage, and even death can occur. Increased risk is seen in: Older dogs with a deep chest (like the Wirehaired Pointing Griffon) Dogs that are fed from elevated food bowls Dogs that are fed only once per day The longer a dog experiencing GDV goes without intervention, the greater the risk of death. Surgery is required to return the stomach to the right location and secure it in place. A prophylactic gastropexy can be performed to prevent GDV. This surgery secures the stomach in the right position and keeps GDV from occurring. This is often done at the same time asspay or neuter surgery. Feeding your Wirehaired Pointing Griffon a food meeting theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)nutritional standards is a good way to make sure they receive acomplete and balanced diet. Talk to your veterinarian about thebest food to feed your Griff, as it varies depending on your dog’s lifestyle, age, and health. Full-grown Griffon dogs should be fed twice a day. Wirehaired Pointing Griffonpuppies need to eat three or four times every dayto maintain a healthy blood-sugar level. Older dogs with deep chests should also be fed smaller meals more frequently to help decrease the risk of bloat. Using aslow feeder bowlcan help to pace your Griff when they eat, which can help prevent bloat and GDV. Do not feed your Wirehaired Pointing Griffon from a raised food bowl, as this can increase the risk of bloat and GDV. A dog’s recommended caloric intake depends on their size, metabolism, neuter status, and activity level. The best way to determinehow much to feed your dogis to talk with your veterinarian. The packaging on your AAFCO-compliant dog food will also provide portion guidance. Maintaining a lean bodyandhealthy weightis important for protecting a Wirehaired Pointing Griffon’s joints. Though an AAFCO-compliant dog food will provide your pup with essential nutrients, Griffs can also benefit from the addition of omega-3 fatty acids (DHA/EPA) into their diet. Omega-3 fatty acids can be found in skin and joint supplements,fish oil, and even in somespecially formulated dog foods. These fatty acids will act as natural anti-inflammatories that support the skin, coat, kidneys, joints, and heart. Despite being bred as a hardworking hunter, the Wirehaired Pointing Griffon is a gentle dog. They are social pups that desire to spend time with and please their pet parents—especially during outdoor activities. While all dogs (no matter the breed) and children should be supervised andtaught how to interact with each other, Wirehaired Pointing Griffons are generally patient and gentle with children whensocialized as puppies. Due to their history as bird dogs, this breed does best with a physical job that will keep their brain and body active. At a minimum, Wirehaired Pointing Griffons need 20 minutes of activity twice a day. If they are left alone too frequently and not given enough stimulation, they candevelop separation anxietyand may even become destructive. Their hunting history also means these pups canhave a strong prey drive. A Griff might see smaller animals, such as cats and rabbits, as something to chase. Introductions between this dog breed and smaller petsneed to be done properly to ensure everyone gets along. Wirehaired Pointing Griffons desire to please their family. This, coupled with their high intelligence, makes them easy to train. They respond best to direct, concise instruction particularly when paired with game-oriented positive reinforcement. The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon has a wiry outer coat and soft undercoat. Despite their double coat, Griffs are a low-shedding breed. They are relatively low-maintenance when it comes to grooming, but some at-home brushing and hand stripping is necessary. Routine bathinghelps maintain a Griff’s healthy skin but is only necessary a few times a year. Bathing your Griffon dog more than once a month can strip the skin of its natural oils. The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon needs to be brushed weekly, and some individuals need to be hand stripped (a process where the hair is removed from the root instead of trimmed) routinely. According to the AWPGA, cutting the coat (instead of properly hand stripping) will make your Griff’s fur grow back “much fuzzier. ” Conditioning sprays can be helpful for maintaining a smoother coat. Trimming between the toes can help protect their paw hairs from becoming tangled and inflamed. Wiping your Griffon dog’s eyes daily with a soft, moist cloth orpet-safe wipewill help remove debris. The hair around the eyes should be carefully trimmed to keep it from irritating the eyes. If squinting oreye dischargeis noted, notify your veterinarian, as these can be signs of moreserious eye conditions. Cleaning the earsevery one or two weeks for maintenance helps toprevent ear infections. If redness, odor, or debris is noted, an infection may be present and you need to consult your veterinarian. The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon is a gentle, intelligent dog that’s eager to please. They love spending time with their humans and do not appreciate being left alone for extended periods. Under supervision, they are usually patient with young children. They require physical activity and mental stimulation, which can be best met bygiving them a job. They are a low-shedding breed with minimal grooming needs. The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon may bark to alert their family when someone is approaching. But when well exercised and mentally simulated, they aren’t known to be excessive barkers. The Wirehaired Pointing Griffon is a low-shedding breed. However, they do require some special grooming. The Griff is a good family dog for those who are prepared to spend time exercising and playing with their pet, plus keeping them mentally engaged. The Griff is loyal to their family and aims to please, which makes them a relatively easy dog to train. Featured Image: maureenjordan/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Virginia LaMon graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians