SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/toy-poodle

Istock/servando Juvera The Toy Poodle is one of thesmartest dog breeds—as well as one of the most entertaining. Despite standing no more than 10 inches tall and weighing 4–6 pounds, the Toy Poodle has a big, playful personality that can fill up a room. While frequently associated with France,Standard Poodleswere first developed in Germany, where they were used in duck hunting. Toy andMiniature Poodleshave been bred down from the larger Standard Poodle, according toThe Poodle Club of America. Toy Poodles aren’t just adorable; they makewonderful family pets. They’re exceptionally intelligent and eager to please, making them easy to train. They have lower exercise needs than many other dog breeds, but they still benefit from adaily walkand at-home play sessions. Poodles of all sizes have curly coats with extensive grooming needs. Their coat grows continuously, calling for a trim every four to six weeks. Toy Poodles also don’t shed much, so they can be a smart choice for some people with allergies. However, there is no such thing as acompletely “hypoallergenic” dog. People with allergies should spend time with the breed before officially bringing home a Toy Poodle puppy. The typical Toy Poodle lifespan is 10–18 years, and they’re ahealthy breed overall. But during thislong life, they are predisposed to a few health issues that may require care. Pet parents may benefit frominvesting in pet insuranceearly in their Toy Poodle’s life. Reputable Toy Poodle breederswill screen their dogs for many of these conditions so they produce healthy puppies. You can gain more insight into your Toy Poodle’s health by screening them for over 230 genetic health conditions with adog DNA test. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA)is a group of diseases that cause a breakdown of the photoreceptor cells (rods and cones) on the retina. Initially, the dog may have difficulty seeing in the dark, but the condition can cause blindness over time. PRA is an inherited disease and there are currently no effective treatments available. The patella (kneecap) is a small bone that normally sits in a groove within the femur (thigh bone) at the knee. Indogs with patellar luxation, the patella moves (luxates) outside of its assigned groove when the knee is flexed. This abnormal movement can cause discomfort and may eventually lead toarthritis. Many pets will skip or run on three legs when the patella is out of place. While some cases will correct themselves, in more severe cases the patella remains out of place. In mild cases,joint supplements(such asfish oilsand glucosamine),anti-inflammatory medications, weight management, and diet changes are used to control pain and minimize arthritis. In more severely affected dogs, surgery may be recommended. Legg-Calve-Perthes diseaseis a condition in which the head of the femur (thigh bone) breaks down, likely secondary to lack of blood supply. Legg-Calve-Perthes occurs in young dogs, mostly in Toy Poodle puppies less than 18 months old. In some cases,pain can be controlled with medications. In severe cases, surgery to remove the head of the femur may be recommended. Ear infections in dogsoccur when there’s an overgrowth of yeast and/or bacteria in the ear. Symptoms include visible debris, redness, odor,head shaking, and scratching. Take your dog to the veterinarian for an exam if any of these signs are noted. In most cases, ear infections can be resolved bycleaning the earwithvet-approved ear cleaners, giving your dog prescription medication, and identifying the underlying causes of the infection (allergies). Toy Poodles develop ear infections more often than most other breeds. This may be partly due to Poodles having long ear canals with excess curly hair to trap in moisture and debris. Trimming (not plucking) the hair from the ear may help reduce the incidence of ear infections. Dogs with chronic or recurring ear infectionsfrequently have allergiesthat should be addressed. Dental diseaseis one of the most common conditions seen in dogs, especially in small breeds like the Toy Poodle. Dental disease occurs when tartar and plaque build up. This leads to bacterial infection of the tissues around the teeth and under the gumline—and eventually to tooth and bone decay. Daily tooth brushingwith adog-specific toothpasteis the best way to prevent dental disease, though somediets,treats, andchew toysalso help prevent plaque and tartar. Routine dental cleaningsare recommended to evaluate your dog’s mouth, remove plaque and tartar, polish the teeth, and treat or extract teeth that are significantly unhealthy. Dental disease is a painful condition and may even affect the health of your Toy Poodle’s internal organs. Tracheal collapseoccurs when the trachea (commonly called the windpipe) flattens. This happens due to weak cartilage rings or the sagging of a membrane along the trachea. Symptoms include adry cough, which can worsen when your Toy Poodle eats or when she’s excited. Most cases are treated using medications, but in severe cases where breathing is impeded, surgery may be necessary. Toy Poodles are likely genetically predisposed to tracheal collapse. To prevent and manage this condition, it’s important tokeep your dog at a healthy weight. When on walks,use a harnessor ano-pull head-collarinstead of attaching a leash to your dog’s collar, as pressure on the trachea can cause further damage. Von Willebrand’s Disease(vWD) is a genetic blood disorder often seen in Toy Poodles. The condition causes a deficiency in a protein called the von Willebrand factor, which is necessary for platelets to stick together and form a clot. In dogs that are deficient in this protein, the blood may have difficulty clotting, which can lead to bleeding from the nose, vulva, bladder, or gums. Additionally, dogs with this condition may bleed for a long time after trauma or surgery. Because some dogs with VWD do not have notably prolonged bleeding until later in adulthood, blood levels of von Willebrand factor can be measured to help with diagnosis. Most veterinarians recommend testing for VWD prior to any planned surgery, including spays, neuters, and dewclaw removals. Feeding a commercial kibble or wet food that meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)is a good way to ensure that your Toy Poodle receives a complete and balanced diet. Puppies should be fed adiet formulated specifically for puppiesor designated for all life stages. For Toy Poodle adults, dental-focused diets may be recommended by your veterinarian to help prevent dental disease. Talk to your vet about thebest food for your dog. Some brands, including Royal Canin, even makedog food just for Poodle puppiesandadult dogs. Because Toy Poodles are small dogs, they will do well with two to three feedings per day. Toy poodle puppies, however, should eat three to four small meals per day on a consistent schedule to help maintain their blood sugar and preventhypoglycemia. The recommended caloric intake for a Toy Poodle varies from dog to dog and depends on your pup’s physical size, metabolism, neuter status, and activity level. The best way to determine the feeding quantity is to talk with your veterinarian, who cancalculate your Toy Poodle’s caloric needs. Additionally, thefeeding guide labelson the dog food provides valuable information for pet parents. Just remember: In small breeds like the Toy Poodle, calories in treats add up quickly. Treats should only make up 10% of your dog’s daily diet. The other 90% should come from dog food. Some Toy Poodles may benefit from omega-3 fatty acids (DHA/EPA) added to their diets. Omega-3 fatty acids can be found in skin and joint supplements, fish oil, and even in some specially formulated dog foods. These fatty acids act as natural anti-inflammatories that help support the skin, coat, kidneys, joints, and heart. As a breed, Toy Poodles are exceptionally intelligent and eager to please their family. They are playful and self-confident whensocialized at a young age. While relatively calm, Toy Poodles enjoy playtime and exercise with the family. The breed is gentle with other pets and children, though all interactions between dogs and kids should be supervised. Because these pups are so tiny, they can accidentally be hurt during playtime. Toy Poodles bond closely to their families and maydevelop separation anxietyif left alone for extended periods. They can also be sensitive to stress, and sudden changes in the home environment may lead to gastrointestinal upset. Additionally, because all Poodles are so smart, they needmental stimulationto keep themselves entertained—and out of trouble. Bored dogs are more likely tobark,jump, and be destructive. Keep your Toy Poodle busy with interactive playtime, toys, and training sessions. Toy Poodles want to please their pet parents. Paired with their smarts, this makes them an easy breed to train. As always, training is most successful when based onpositive reinforcementwith praise and tasty treats. But make sure you’re not overfeeding them with treat rewards! Obedience training Nose work and tracking Enrichment puzzles Agility All Poodle sizes have hair (not fur!) that grows throughout life and sheds very little. But that hair is dense and mats easily, requiring routine care. Most Toy Poodles should bebathed every two to four weeks, but your vet may recommend more frequent bathing depending on your dog’s health and any underlying medical conditions. A gentle,dog-specific shampooand conditioner work well on their curls. Unless your Toy Poodle’s coat is groomed very short, it’s important tobrush their hair dailyto prevent matting. The hair needs to be detangled all the way to the roots. Originally, Poodles were groomed with theclassic Continental clipfor hunting. This style limited the amount of heavy hair that had to be carried, while still protecting important parts of the body from cold weather and water. This Poodle haircut is less common in house pets today, as the short “puppy cut” requires less home care. No matter what haircut your Toy Poodle has, most need to be professionally groomed every four to six weeks. Wiping your Toy Poodle’s eyes daily with a soft, moist cloth orvet-recommended eye cleanerwill help remove debris. Some Poodles are prone to heavytear staining around the eyes, but rinsing the corners of the eyes daily with saline can help prevent this. Hair around your Toy Poodle’s eye should be carefully trimmed to keep it from causing irritation. If squinting oreye dischargeis noted, take a trip to the veterinarian for an exam, as these can be signs of more serious eye conditions. Toy Poodles often develop ear infections due to allergies. To prevent these, clean your dog’s ears every week or two, as directed by veterinarian, and keep the ear hairs trimmed (not plucked). Redness, odor, or debris may indicate an infection, and you should consult your veterinarian. Toy Poodles make wonderful pets for nearly any family—as long as you dedicate time and money to grooming. They are extremely intelligent and eager to please, which makes them easy (and fun!) to train with treats and praise. Their intelligence also means they require a lot of mental stimulation via activities like scent walks, puzzle toys, and obedience training. When socialized early in life, most Toy Poodles are gentle with children and pets. No, Toy Poodles shed very little. Despite this, they need near-daily grooming for their high-maintenance coat. No dog is 100% hypoallergenic, but Toy Poodles have a reputation for being good pets for some people with pet allergies. Yes, Toy Poodles are exceptional pets due to their impressive intelligence and good nature. They are relatively easy to train and do well with small children, if socialized early. Purchasing a Toy Poodle puppy from a breeder can cost between $1,200–$3,000. Dogs of certain lineage may cost more. Poodles andPoodle mixescan also be found in rescues and shelters. A Toy Poodle, full-grown, is typically no more than 10 inches tall and weighs between 4–6 pounds. Yes, Toy Poodles have a reputation for barking a lot. Keeping your dog entertained with mental stimulation and exercise can help reduce excess barking. The main difference betweenthe three types of Poodlesis size: Standard Poodlesare over 15 inches tall and weigh 40–70 pounds. Miniature Poodlesare 10–15 inches tall and weigh 10–15 pounds. Toy Poodlesare no more than 10 inches tall and weigh only 4–6 pounds. Virginia LaMon graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians