SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/norwegian-lundehund

Erica Puisis Adobe_stock/Radomir Rezny The Norwegian Lundehund dog is a small Spitz-type dog breed that reaches 12–18 pounds and stands 12–15 inches tall. Originating in Norway, these dogs are sometimes referred to as Lundies or Puffin dogs, with the latter nickname reflecting the dog’s heritage as a capable Puffin retriever forNorwegian hunters. A fox-like appearance is likely to be the first thing you’ll notice about this breed, but it’s not their only unique physical feature. “Lundies have physical characteristics found in no other dog, including six fully developed toes on all four feet, an extremely flexible spine and shoulders, and ears that fold completely shut,” says Kristina Maze, a member of theNorwegian Lundehund Association of America(NLAA) and owner of two Norwegian Lundehunds. These adaptations—especially the Norwegian Lundehund’s feet—were especially helpful to the breed as they navigated rocky crags and caves, hunting for puffins. The Norwegian Lundehund’s small stature makes thesedogs adaptable to life in an apartmentor a house, but they do require regular exercise to expend their energy and challenge their mind. Lundies are also known for their loyal and playful disposition, making themgood family dogs. The breed’s grooming needs are minimal, but they are susceptible to a few gastrointestinal (GI) issues, meaning special care must be paid to their diet. With proper care, the average Norwegian Lundehund lifespan is 12–15 years. Norwegian Lundehunds don’t suffer from a wide array of health problems, but they are prone to gastrointestinal issues. Pet insurance is a wise investmentfor treating GI conditions and coveringroutine blood workfor monitoring, saysSusan Torgerson, a Norwegian Lundehund breeder and retired veterinarian. Also known asintestinal protein loss, PLE is a condition caused by excessive amounts of proteins leaking into the intestinal tract. The most common conditions that lead to PLE include: Intestinal lymphangiectasia Cancer Allergies Infections Inflammatory bowel disease The most common symptoms of PLE includediarrhea,lethargy, andweight loss. Treatment or management of intestinal protein loss depends on your dog’s underlying condition diagnosis. Inflammatory bowel disease in dogsis caused by chronic irritation in the intestinal tract, which interferes with proper nutrient absorption. This can cause: Diarrhea Vomiting Reduced appetite Weight loss Swelling of the limbs Blood clots(in extreme cases) Low levels of albumin (a blood protein) andanemiaare among the factors that can indicate IBD. This is why frequent blood tests are often recommended for Norwegian Lundehunds. IBD is diagnosed with imaging, such as anultrasoundand/or intestinal biopsies. While there’s no cure for IBD, it can be managed through medications and diet changes. Because Norwegian Lundehund dogs are prone to intestinal protein loss,small intestinal bacterial overgrowthfrequently becomes a problem as well. SIBO occurs because the undigested nutrients passing through the digestive tract are used by harmful bacteria, causing a rapid population growth of these undesirable bacteria. Oral antibiotics are the most common treatment for SIBO. Dogs with SIBO often havechronic diarrhea, often lasting weeks to months. Like all dogs, Norwegian Lundehunds will benefit from a high-quality diet that meets the nutritional standards outlined by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). However, it’s wise to ask your veterinarian for specific dietary guidance, especially if your Lundie deals with intestinal problems. You should feed a Norwegian Lundehund two meals each day of dog food appropriate for your pet’s life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior). Norwegian Lundehund puppies may need to eat more frequently—up to four times every day. Because the breed has a sensitive digestive tract, it’s important not to ignore your veterinarian’s advice on the type and quantity of food. A healthy Norwegian Lundehund needs enough calories to maintain their active nature; it’s usually best to follow the feeding guidelines for the specific dog food formula you choose or consult your veterinarian. Keep in mind that if you notice lethargy or weight loss, increasing caloric intake may not be the answer; these are often symptoms of gastrointestinal issues. Make an appointment with your veterinarian right away if your Lundie is experiencing these changes. Your veterinarian is in the best position to recommend specificdog supplementsfor your Norwegian Lundehund. Because of the breed’s tendency to experience SIBO, aprobiotic supplementmay help maintain the population of beneficial bacteria in your dog’s gut. If blood work shows low levels of B12 as a result of SIBO, your vet might also suggest B12 injections. Never give your dog a supplement without talking with your vet first. A Norwegian Lundehund is best described as alert, independent, and inquisitive. They have a reputation for being active enough to keep up with activities likehikingandlong walks, but they’re also happy to settle down inside the house. Withproper socialization, a Lundie’s playful nature means they can get along with other pets and children. But with strangers, these dogs can be aloof and reserved. Most Norwegian Lundehund dogs have a balanced disposition that isn’t overly hyperactive, skittish, or needy. While these dogs do enjoy time spent with their pet parents, they’re not overly affectionate or cuddly; Maze says a Lundehund lap dog is rare. They arealarm barkersand will alert you to unfamiliar sights and sounds, but they are not prone tonuisance barking—if they get enough exercise andmental stimulationto prevent boredom. Because Norwegian Lundehund dogs are independent andsmart dogs, consistency, adaptability, andpositive reinforcementare important in the training process. “Lundies are very smart but clever,” Torgerson says. “They learn quickly, but then ask, ‘Why?’” Motivation is key:dog treats,toys, or even praise andpetting your dogcan be excellent training aids. Patience is a must when training a Norwegian Lundehund, and Maze says the dogs can take longer topotty trainandleash trainthan some other breeds due to their independent nature. “Training has to be consistent and in short intervals, sprinkled with lots of praise,” she says. Because of these training challenges, a Lundie is not always thebest choice for a first-time pet parent. But guidance from an experienced dog trainer can help. Agility Lure coursing Hiking Fetch Norwegian Lundehund dogs have a short, dense double coat that’s weather-resistant, low-maintenance, and sheds moderately. The coat typically ranges from fallow (a pale brown) to tan or reddish-brown, with black-tipped hair that darkens as the dog matures. Norwegian Lundehunds don’t require special skin care, and their double coat does an excellent job of repelling dirt and protecting the skin underneath. Anoccasional bathmight be needed when a Lundie becomes especially dirty from outdoor activities. Brushing your doga couple times each week is typically all that’s needed to maintain the Lundie’s coat. Doing so will distribute oils to promote shine, reduce shedding, and remove dander. Twice a year, a Norwegian Lundehund dog will shed a lot more than usual; in fall and spring, you may need to increase the frequency of brushing. You won’t typically need to give a Norwegian Lundehund any specific eye care. That said, you should regularly check the eyes forcloudiness, irritation, ordischarge. If you notice a change in your dog’s eyes, contact your veterinarian right away. The upright ears of the Norwegian Lundehund dog are unique for their ability to fold flat against the head, but there’s no specific ear-care regimen required for this breed. While brushing your dog, inspect the ears forsigns of an ear infectionor irritation. You’ll need toclean your dog’s earsafter they’re in water (such as after a bath) with aveterinarian-recommended ear cleaner. The unique appearance, inquisitive personality, and compact size of the Norwegian Lundehund makes them an appealing pick for a small but sturdy dog breed. But it’s important to consider all aspects of the breed’s temperament and care requirements before you start looking for a Norwegian Lundehund puppy. “They are difficult to house train, and their GI disease needs a more experienced dog person,” Maze says. With that in mind, Lundies may not be the best pick for new dog parents or if you’re wary of navigating the breed’s health challenges. Norwegian Lundehunds are very rare because of the breed’s small population in their homeland of Norway. These dogs were once commonly kept ashunting dogsbecause of their adept ability to retrieve puffins. But when puffins became endangered and hunting them was outlawed, the breed fell out of popularity. A Norwegian Lundehund has a combination of unique physical attributes not found in other purebred dogs: six toes, a highly flexible neck and shoulder joints, and ears that close on demand. These attributes were helpful when the dog would enter tight spaces or when climbing rocky slopes in search of puffins. The Norwegian Lundehund price varies significantly based on the breeder—and the greater challenge may be finding a reputable kennel with Norwegian Lundehund puppies. There are very few Norwegian Lundehund breeders in the U. , so you may have to import a puppy from Europe if you’re serious about the breed. When available, you can expect to pay $1,000 or more for a Lundie puppy. WRITTEN BY Erica Puisis Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians