SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/tibetan-terrier

The Tibetan Terrier is a shaggy pup bred in Tibetan monasteriesmore than 2,000 years agoto be a companion pet who looked after the community. Today, they are known to be highly devoted to their family members. Tibetan Terriers are not actuallyterrier dogs—the American Kennel Club (AKC) classifies them as a non-sporting breed. The size of Tibetan Terriers ranges from 14 to 17 inches tall and up to 30 pounds. The breed is characterized by a double coat, which kept them warm in their cold homeland. Their snowshoe-like feet, which are wide and round with a flat bottom, provided traction as they navigated the snow-covered mountains of Tibet. The Tibetan Terrier is a lovingfamily dog, but they may be aloof and watchful around new people thanks to their history as monastery guardians. Socializing a Tibetan Terrier puppyearly and consistently can help them become more accepting of strangers. Tibetan Terriers require at least an hour of exercise daily, but happily accept more activity if given the opportunity. They also need to be brushed once or twice a week to prevent their long, double coat from matting. The Tibetan Terrier isgenerally a healthy breedwith alifespan of 15–16 years. However, they are prone to some inherited conditions. Tibetan Terriers are prone to many different eye conditions, including: Cataracts:A cataract occurs when the lens within the eye becomes cloudy. Cataracts can develop secondary to diabetes mellitus in some Tibetan Terriers. The cataract’s size determines the degree of vision impairment, and surgery to remove the cataract may be needed to restore eyesight. Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA):PRA causes the retina to slowly degenerate, leading to blindness. There is no cure for PRA, but blind Tibetan Terriers can a live long, happy life with proper care. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:This is an inherited neurologic disease that causes progressive and irreversible central nervous system changes. Tibetan Terriers with this condition can developaggression, difficulty walking, altered vision, andseizures. Primary lens luxation:Lens luxation is a painful genetic eye condition in which the lens is displaced. This condition can cause blindness if surgical correction is not performed quickly. Distichiasis:Distichiasis causes extra eyelashes to grow and rub against the eye’s surface, causing irritation and possiblycorneal ulcers. Cryosurgery can be performed to freeze the hair follicles of the extra eyelashes to prevent regrowth; however, the procedure may need to be repeated. Hip dysplasiais an inherited orthopedic condition that causes faulty hip joint alignment, which can lead toarthritis. Hip dysplasia can develop in one or both hip joints. Tibetan Terriers can be born with congenital hip dysplasia or develop the condition during their senior years. Symptoms include: Lameness Slowness to rise from a lying position “Bunny-hopping” gait when running Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting up Reputable Tibetan Terrier breeders will screen their dogs for this condition, so it’s best to purchase a puppy from a breeder who has PennHIP-certified dogs. Hip dysplasia can generally be managed withjoint supplementsand medications, but serious cases may require surgery. Patellar luxationcauses a dog’s kneecap (patella) to move out of place (luxate), most often because the groove housing the kneecap is too shallow. There are varying degrees of kneecap luxation, with the most severe requiring orthopedic surgery. Reputable breeders will have their dogs evaluated for patellar luxation to ensure that only those without this medical condition are used for breeding. Diabetes mellitus(DM) is an endocrine disorder characterized by an insulin deficiency that leads to elevated blood glucose levels. Middle-aged Tibetan Terriers have a higher risk of developing the condition than most other dog breeds. DM is managed with insulin injections, astrict diet, and blood glucose monitoring. Atopic dermatitis, or atopy, is an inflammatory skin condition characterized by severe itching. Atopy is triggered byenvironmental allergens, such as pollen, dust mites, or mold. Symptoms usually develop between 2 and 6 years of age, so regular veterinary visits are important to monitor your dog’s skin health. Atopy is not curable, but the associated itching can be managed with medications such asApoquel®andCytopoint®, and by treating secondary skin infections that arise. When considering bringing home a Tibetan Terrier puppy, locate a breeder whose dogs are examined routinely by a veterinarian and undergo genetic testing to minimize the risk of inherited conditions. Tibetan Terriers should be fed ahigh-quality dog foodformulated for small- ormedium-sized breedsthat meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Adult Tibetan Terriers should be fed twice daily. Tibetan Terrierpuppies need to eat more frequently—up to three or four times per day. Like all dogs, Tibetan Terriers should always be fed a diet that matches their life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior), and no more than 10% of their diet should consist of treats. Dog food packaging provides guidance on how much to feed your dog based on their ideal weight. But for the best advice, consult your veterinarian. A vet can tell youhow much to feedyour Tibetan Terrier based on their health, lifestyle, and age. A healthy Tibetan Terrier fed an AAFCO-compliant dog food shouldn’t need anything additional. However, there are instances where a veterinarian may recommendsupplements for your dog. For example, if your Tibetan Terrier has atopic dermatitis, anomega-3 fatty acid supplementcontaining EPA and DHA can help reduce skin inflammation and promote a shiny, healthy coat. Tibetan Terriers with joint issues, such as a patellar luxation or hip dysplasia, may benefit from a joint supplement and an omega-3 fatty acid supplement to reduce joint inflammation. Talk with your veterinarian to find out if your Tibetan Terrier would benefit from a supplement. Tibetan Terriers are devoted family members and extremely affectionate to those who care for them. Because of their history as monastery guardians, they may be suspicious of new people and mightbark at strangers. Tibetan Terriers need at least an hour of exercise every day; this could be along walk,hike, or running around the backyard. They can be good with young children and other dogs when introductions are supervised and done properly. Enrolling your Tibetan Terrier puppy in socialization classes before they’re 16 weeks old can help them become comfortable around children, other dogs, and new people. Tibetan Terriers were bred to be companion pets and are devoted to their family members. Because of this, they maydevelop separation anxietywhen left alone. It’s important tocrate train puppies at an early ageand provideinteractive toyswhen they’re left alone to help keep them occupied. Tibetan Terriers canbark at things they deem a threat, including neighbors walking by or a delivery person ringing the doorbell. Early socialization and positive reinforcement can helpkeep your pup from barkingexcessively. Due to theirhigh intelligenceand loyalty, Tibetan Terrier puppies are usually easy to train. They respond well topositive reinforcement, such as receiving praise and treats when they behave properly. Tibetan Terrier puppies should be enrolled in socialization, obedience, and puppy training classes at a young age, ideally before they’re 16 weeks old. Crate training can help prevent separation anxiety. Agility Long walks Hiking Nose work Rally Tibetan Terriers are well known for their double coat. The top layer consists of long, fine fur that covers the wool-like undercoat. Their double coat protects them from harsh, cold environments, so they do well in chillier temperatures as long asit’s not too cold. Tibetan Terriers require a moderate amount of maintenance to keep their coat free of mats and debris, such as leaves and sticks. Tibetan Terriers can develop allergy-related skin issues, so it’s important to check their skin frequently and contact your veterinarian if you notice any changes such as redness or dryness. While frequent bathing isn’t necessary, Tibetan Terriers should be bathed when their coat becomes dirty or smelly. The Tibetan Terrier’s long, double coat should be brushed several times a weekto prevent matting. A professional groomer can help minimize coat care needs by keeping their fur trimmed shorter so it’s easier to manage. Even with a shorter cut, the Tibetan Terrier still needs to be brushed frequently to prevent mats. Tibetan Terriers are genetically prone to several different eye disorders. When researching a Tibetan Terrier breeder, work with one who has their breeding dogs examined and tested for various ocular disorders. It’s important to buy a Tibetan Terrier puppy from a breeder who only breeds dogs without a history of eye issues. After bringing home your pup,schedule a wellness exam with your veterinarianto have their eyes looked at. This should be done once a year. If you notice any changes in your dog’s eyes or vision (for example, if you notice your Tibetan Terrier bumping into things or hesitating to go outside after dark), schedule a vet appointment as soon as possible. In addition to many eye conditions, Tibetan Terriers candevelop tear staining, which can be removed with apet-safe wipeor a warm, moist washcloth. This breed’s long hair can also affect their vision, so keep the fur around your Tibetan Terrier’s eyes trimmed short enough to prevent it from getting in your pup’s way. Tibetan Terriers are not as prone tofrequent ear infectionsas some other dog breeds. However, they can occasionally develop ear infections, especially if they have allergies or get water in their ears during a bath. Cleaning their earswitha routine ear cleanerthat contains a drying agent can help minimize ear infections. It’s also important to clean their ears after a bath or other water activity, such asswimming. If your Tibetan Terrier has allergies, ask your veterinarian how often you should clean your dog’s ears to reduce the risk of infection. Tibetan Terriers need at least one hour of exercise daily, and they tend to bark a lot. For these reasons, they may not be ideal for apartment living and will likely do best in a house. Although Tibetan Terriers do not require a fenced yard, they will need long daily walks or hikes if they do not have a place to burn excess energy. Without adequate exercise, Tibetan Terriers can become destructive. Tibetan Terrier pet parents also need to keep up with their dog’s grooming and social needs. Brushing their coat a few times every week will keep it mat-free while providing quality time together. Tibetan Terriers can develop separation anxiety if left alone for long periods, so they do best with people who work from home or who can bring their dog along on errands and adventures. All Tibetan Terrier puppies should take socialization, puppy training, and obedience classes so they become comfortable around new people, young children, and other dogs. Tibetan Terriers require training, consistent and early socialization, lots of affection, at least one hour of exercise daily, and brushing sessions throughout the week. Some pet parents may consider this a lot of maintenance. Yes, the Tibetan Terrier is a good family dog. They are loyal and loving to their family members thanks to their history as companion pets. When properly socialized and trained, they can be well-behaved around children and other dogs. Tibetan Terriers tend to bark when they feel unsure of a new person or situation. Early socialization and training can help curb this behavior. Featured Image: SStajic/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians