SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/general-health/can-you-be-allergic-dog-saliva

Bianca Mendez SolStock/E+ via Getty Images Dog allergies affect10–20% of the global population. If you’ve ever noticed allergy symptoms after beingkissed by a dog, you’re probably wondering if their saliva is the culprit. The short answer? Yes, it is possible to be allergic to dog saliva, says Purvi Parikh, MD, FACAAI, a NYC-based allergist and immunologist and spokesperson for theAllergy & Asthma Network. Read on to learn more about how dog saliva may contribute to your pet allergies and how to manage them. A dog’s saliva contains Can f1, a protein that can cause an allergic reaction, says Dr. This protein is also found in dog urine and dander, and it becomes airborne as pets shed and clean themselves. “A common misconception is that dog hair causes allergies. However, pet dander, saliva, and urine are the primarycauses of allergic symptoms,” says Stephanie Kayode, BSc, MBChB, MRCP, a London-based allergy physician. “All three can transfer onto and accumulate on dog hair as pets shed skin and groom themselves. ” In people with a dog allergy, the immune system mistakenly identifies proteins in dog saliva as harmful, she says. In response, the immune system releases chemicals, such as histamine, into the bloodstream and surrounding tissues, triggering an allergic reaction. Dog allergies usually develop over time. “Your immune system needs to see something multiple times for it to develop the allergy and react to it,” Dr. Parikh, common dog allergy symptoms may include: Itchy skin Hives Itchy watery eyes Stuffy nose Sneezing Coughing Wheezing Shortness of breath and other asthma symptoms. Parikh says it’s very rare for dog allergies to cause anaphylaxis. However, asthma can commonly occur and can be deadly if uncontrolled. Always seek medical attention to help you manage your dog allergy symptoms. Yes, you can be allergic to ahypoallergenic dog’s saliva. Though some breeds likePortuguese Water Dogs,Poodles, andGoldendoodleshave a reputation for being allergen-friendly, Dr. Parikh says they still carry the protein Can f 1. Kayode says there is no single dog breed that is truly hypoallergenic, meaning they produce no allergens. “Some breeds produce more allergens than others,” she explains. “But tolerance to a given breed can vary from person to person, depending on individual sensitivities. Kayode adds that it may be possible to find a specific breed that causes fewer symptoms and helps you manage your allergies. For example, she says short-haired,hairless, andlow-shedding dog breedscan be good options because they spread fewer dander allergens. However, allergic reactions are still possible with these dog breeds. If you suspect you’re allergic to dogs, Dr. Kayode recommends seeing your doctor for a skin prick test or a blood test. Your doctor may prescribe you medications such as antihistamines, steroid nasal sprays, eye drops, or, in some cases, asthma inhalers. Parikh says allergy shots may reduce sensitivity to dogs over time, though they’re not a cure for dog allergies. Pet parents can take extra measures to reduce allergen exposure in their home. Kayode recommends: Keeping your dogsaway from your bed Using a HEPA-filter air purifier to reduce the buildup of dog allergens inside the home  Washingdog beddingandblanketsat high temperatures Cleaning carpets and rugs regularly using a HEPA-filter vacuum  Bathing your dog oftenand trimming their hair short WRITTEN BY Bianca Mendez Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians