SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/general-health/how-long-do-flea-and-tick-medications-take-work-dogs

Istock/Dmitrii Anikin If you’ve found fleas or ticks on your dog, don’t panic. Most flea and tick medications for dogs start working within a few hours, though the exact timeline depends on the type of product used. Some oral treatments can even begin killing fleas in 30 minutes. The quicker you can kill fleas and ticks, the better, as they can cause serious health problems for your pet, including flea allergy dermatitis, tapeworms, Lyme disease, anaplasmosis, and ehrlichiosis. After administeringflea and tick medicationto your dog, you should start seeing dead fleas within 24 hours. Even after the fleas are killed, it may take a few days for the itching to decrease. Once treatment has started, most veterinarians recommend regular monthly treatment throughout the full year to keep pests away for good. Theflea life cyclefrom egg to adult is about three months, and some medications only treat the adult fleas. Ticks are hardier than fleas, so it will take longer (closer to 24–48 hours depending on the type of treatment) for a treatment to work. Dead ticks may or may not fall off your dog. It is generally recommended to have dead ticksremovedby a veterinarian as soon as possible to ensure that the head of the tick, which can be buried under your dog’s skin, is completely removed. Oral flea and tick medications for dogs are taken by mouth and come in chew form or tablets. Some fast-acting oral medications, likeCapstar tablets, begin killing fleas within 30 minutes. However, they may not protect against ticks or other parasites. Also, as is the case with Capstar, they may only last 24 hours. Most oral flea and tick preventives begin working within a few hours. Protection typically lasts one month, depending on the product. For example,Credeliois a monthly chewable tablet that starts killing fleas and theIxodes Ricinustick within four hours. Topical preventions are liquid products generally applied to the skin at the neck's nape. How fast topical flea medications work depends on the product. For example,Advantage IIkills fleas within 12 hours. These products can be toxic when ingested (especially if acat ingests a dog flea preventive), so it is important that these products have dried on dogs before other pets or children are allowed to interact with them. Bathing may affect the efficacy of these products; please see the product packing for more information. These products are not all equally effective. Generally, older products use insect growth regulator ingredients which vary in efficacy. These products should not be handled by young children. Serestois a newer, vet-recommended flea and tick collar labeled for over-the-counter use in dogs. It is designed to kill existing fleas on dogs 24 hours after initial application and can be effective for up to eight months. After handling any flea and tick prevention collars, pet parents should wash their hands thoroughly. To get rid of all fleas and ticks, you must do more than just administer medication to your dog. It’s important to also: Ensure that all pets in the home are onflea and/or tick prevention. This includes dogs, cats, ferrets, and rabbits. Vacuum daily to remove flea eggs and larvae,even if you have hardwood or tile flooring. Make sure to discard the vacuum bag or empty the canister immediately after use. Wash all beddingwith hot water weekly. Bathe your dogweeklyto remove dead fleas if you’re managing a flea infestation. Fleas and especially ticks love shaded, dense areas, so keep a distance between your home and any forested areas, dense brush, or tall grasses. Consider having a professional company come to spray your home and yard; just be sure it is a pet-friendly treatment. Ask your vet about insecticides for home use. Sprays, bug bombs, or powders can be beneficial, but it’s crucial to only use pet-safe products and follow the instructions carefully. Watchthis tutorial for step-by-step instructionson how to get rid of fleas in the home. Fleas and ticks can cause itching, skin irritation, and inflammation. The greater the number of these pests, the more irritation. Many dogs are allergic to flea saliva, which can cause a skin condition calledflea allergy dermatitis. Symptoms may include inflammation, itching, open sores, scabs, and hair loss secondary to the allergic reaction to the flea bite. The loss of fur and skin irritation most commonly appears around the lower back, tail, or hind legs. That’s why it is so important to get rid of fleas fast—to reduce the risk of an allergic reaction. In addition to starting flea and tick medication, treatment may include use of medicated shampoos, medicated wipes, oral antibiotics, or anti-inflammatories, depending on the severity of the dermatitis. In large enough numbers, fleas and ticks can causeanemia in dogsas they ingest a blood meal from our pets. If that happens, your pet may have pale gums or be lethargic. Treatment may be as simple as giving your pet an oral iron supplement, or if the anemia is serious enough, it may require that your pet get a blood transfusion. While fleas and ticks can do a vast amount of damage to pets by themselves, they also can carry other diseases that can sicken your dog. Fleas are very likely to carry tapeworms, an intestinal parasite, and several types of bacterial diseases such as plague. If your dog has fleas and develops any additional symptoms like diarrhea, vomiting, or lethargy, talk to your veterinarian. They may recommend additional testing for one or more of these conditions. Ticks often carry bacteria that may cause diseases includingLyme diseaseandRocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Ask your vet if your dog should be tested for common tick-borne illnesses. If your pet has contracted a tick-borne disease, additional treatments such as antibiotics will likely be needed. Most flea and tick treatments for dogs are not safe to use until the puppy is 8 weeks old, although some medications can be used on puppies as young as 4 weeks old or not until they are 24 weeks old. The dog’s weight is also a factor. Always consult with the label on the product and your veterinarian to determine the right product for your specific puppy. Fleas and ticks can cause a range of health problems for pets and people. Fleas can carry tapeworms and bacterial diseases such as plague. Ticks-borne illnesses include Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever. Fleas and ticks both can cause anemia and various skin issues, including flea allergy dermatitis—all the more reason to kill fleas and ticks fast and prevent reinfestation. In addition to fleas and ticks, other parasites, both external and internal, can spell trouble for your dog, including mites, heartworms, roundworms, hookworms, whipworms and tapeworms. Parasiticides can prevent and treat common parasite infections. For example,Interceptor Plus dog chewsprevent heartworm disease; plus it treats and controls adult hookworm, roundworm, whipworm and tapeworm infections. Talk to your vet about parasite protection that’s tailored to your pet’s needs. Fleas as parasites of the family Canidae. The Biology and Ecology of Cat Fleas and Advancements in Their Pest Management: A Review. Saleh M, Sundstrom K, Duncan K, et al. Show us your ticks: a survey of ticks infesting dogs and cats across the USA. Regional distribution of ten common skin diseases in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. Cruthers L, Slone R, Guerrero A, Robertson-Plouch C. Evaluation of the speed of kill of fleas and ticks with Frontline Top Spot in dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics: Research in applied veterinary medicine. Everett R, Cunningham J, Arther R, Bledsoe D, Mencke N. Comparative evaluation of the speed of flea kill of imidacloprid and selamectin on dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics: Research in applied veterinary medicine. Franc M, Bouhsira E, Böhm C, et al. Evaluation of spinosad for the oral treatment and control of flea infestations on cats in Europe. Six R, Becskei C, Carter L, et al. Evaluation of the speed of kill, effects on reproduction, and effectiveness in a simulated infested-home environment of sarolaner (Simparica) against fleas on dogs. Stanneck D, Kruedewagen E, Fourie J, et al. Efficacy of an imidacloprid/flumethrin collar against fleas, ticks, mites, and lice on dogs. "Assessment of the speed of flea kill of lotilaner (Credelio™) throughout the month following oral administration to dogs. "Laboratory evaluation of the speed of kill of lotilaner (Credelio™) against Ixodes ricinus ticks on dogs. Fleas as parasites of the family Canidae. The Biology and Ecology of Cat Fleas and Advancements in Their Pest Management: A Review. Saleh M, Sundstrom K, Duncan K, et al. Show us your ticks: a survey of ticks infesting dogs and cats across the USA. Regional distribution of ten common skin diseases in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. Cruthers L, Slone R, Guerrero A, Robertson-Plouch C. Evaluation of the speed of kill of fleas and ticks with Frontline Top Spot in dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics: Research in applied veterinary medicine. Everett R, Cunningham J, Arther R, Bledsoe D, Mencke N. Comparative evaluation of the speed of flea kill of imidacloprid and selamectin on dogs. Veterinary Therapeutics: Research in applied veterinary medicine. Franc M, Bouhsira E, Böhm C, et al. Evaluation of spinosad for the oral treatment and control of flea infestations on cats in Europe. Six R, Becskei C, Carter L, et al. Evaluation of the speed of kill, effects on reproduction, and effectiveness in a simulated infested-home environment of sarolaner (Simparica) against fleas on dogs. Stanneck D, Kruedewagen E, Fourie J, et al. Efficacy of an imidacloprid/flumethrin collar against fleas, ticks, mites, and lice on dogs. "Assessment of the speed of flea kill of lotilaner (Credelio™) throughout the month following oral administration to dogs. "Laboratory evaluation of the speed of kill of lotilaner (Credelio™) against Ixodes ricinus ticks on dogs. Stephanie Howe graduated from the University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine in 2011, after receiving a Bachelor of Science. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians