SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/sussex-spaniel

Erica Puisis Adobe_stock/Vera Reva The Sussex Spaniel originated in Sussex, England, where the breed starred as a field dog used to find and flush game. Today, the little brown dog is relatively rare in the U. A full-grown Sussex Spaniel is 13–15 inches tall at the shoulder and weighs 35–45 pounds. These dogs are recognized by their solid, golden liver coat and blocky build; they have relatively short legs and a rectangular body, so they’re longer than they are tall. The Sussex Spaniel is a steady,friendly dog breedthat’s easy to get along with, but expect these pups to be an active addition to your family. You’ll need to spend time every day exercising your spaniel and ensuring they receivemental stimulation. Instead of being independent or aloof, Sussex Spaniels enjoy time spent with their pet parents. “Sussex, as a whole, are very loving and like physical contact,” says Bobby Lewis, a longtime breeder and owner ofLexxfield Sussex Spaniels. Lewis says life with this breed is never lonely, and it’s not unusual for a Sussex tofollow a person from room to roomin a house. Along with meeting the Sussex Spaniel’s needs for activity and interaction, you’ll need to ensure they are fed a good diet, given regular veterinary care, and receive routine attention to brushing and trimming their coat. The average Sussex Spaniel lifespan is 13–15 years, and the breed is relatively healthy. “The Sussex Spaniel is among therarest breed of dog, yet health issues are very uncommon,” says Lewis. Although rare, here are a few other health concerns to be aware of within the Sussex Spaniel dog breed. This genetic disorder causes adeficiency in the PDP1 enzymeand results in a buildup of lactic acid in the body. A key symptom is exercise intolerance, but the condition can be fatal. However, adog DNA testcan determine if a Sussex Spaniel is affected by the condition or is a carrier for the gene responsible for the condition. Occasionally, congenital or genetic heart abnormalities, such asheart disease, have been noted within the breed. TheSussex Spaniel Club of Americarecommends a basic cardiac exam for puppies and further testing if there is any cause for concern. Hip dysplasiais when the hip joint becomes loose, resulting in arthritis. Elbow dysplasiais similar and characterized by a loose elbow joint. Both of these joint problems can be worsened byobesity, so it’s important to keep your Sussex Spaniel at ahealthy weight. Lewis also says it’s important for Sussex Spaniel puppies to avoid intense exercise and stairs during their first year of life, as these activities can put too much stress on their joints. Treatment depends on the condition’s severity. Mild to moderate cases can be managed with interventions such as medications,joint supplements, and weight management, but severe cases could need surgery. Choose a high-quality dog food for your Sussex Spaniel. When comparing dog food options, look for one that meets standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)—there will be a seal on the packaging. Your dog’s food should match their life stage; Sussex Spaniel puppies need apuppy foodbeforeswitching to an adult formula. They may benefit from a joint health diet, likeHill’s Science Diet Perfect Weight & Joint Support Dog Food. Talk to your vet about the best dog food for your Sussex Spaniel. A full-grown Sussex Spaniel dog will usually do best with their daily portion of food divided into two meals a day. Most pet parents feed their dog one meal in the morning and another meal in the evening. No special dog bowls are needed, but you should make sure that both thefood bowl and water bowlare washed regularly to prevent bacteria and mold growth. To determine how much to feed your Sussex Spaniel, start by checking the feeding guidelines on the dog food packaging. Usually, these feeding guidelines offer a suggested daily amount to feed your dog based on their weight. You may need to adjust based on your dog’s health, activity level, andbody condition score. If you’re not sure whether you’re overfeeding or underfeeding your pet, ask your veterinarian for their advice. Ask your vet about whichdog supplements—if any—are specifically recommended for your pet before giving any to your Sussex Spaniel. This breed may benefit from certain joint supplements, but only at your veterinarian’s recommendation. Typically, dogs receive all necessary nutrients from their AAFCO-compliant dog food. The Sussex Spaniel has a well-balanced temperament that makes them an excellent companion. Lee Silensky, a Sussex Spaniel breeder and vice president of theSussex Spaniel Club of America, describes the personality of the breed as laid-back and loving, noting that these dogs like to be by your side all the time. However, far from being a one-person dog, the Sussex Spaniel has plenty of loyalty and affection to share. “They bond with the whole family,” says Silensky, adding that the same goes for its younger members: “They are very sensitive and gentle toward children. ” When it comes to other pets, Lewis says the Sussex Spaniel generally does fine with dogs but doesn’t necessarily long for their company. “Given a choice, I believe most Sussex would prefer to be the only pet in the house,” he says. Early socializationandobedience trainingwill help set your Sussex Spaniel up for success when meeting new animals. But when it comes to smaller animals, keep in mind that thebreed’s prey drivecould mean that they see pets like cats, rabbits, or guinea pigs as an opportunity for a game of chase. The Sussex Spaniel’s even-tempered disposition means they aren’t overly prone tofear or anxiety, but they do tend to be a bit aloof toward strangers, says Lewis. The initially cool reception doesn’t last long, however, and these dogs are generally friendly and easygoing. Keep in mind that any dog who doesn’t receive enough physical and mental exercise is more likely to exhibit restlessness or destructive behaviors, likechewinganddigging. This is true for Sussex Spaniels, too, so keep up withregular exerciseand playtime. Expect to take at leastone long walk a day. “The Sussex Spaniel is a sporting dog and needs exercise and activity on a daily basis; they are not couch potatoes,” says Silensky. While the Sussex Spaniel isn’t known to be a big barker at home, these dogs are vocal while tracking game, letting out intermittent barks or yipping as they follow the scent of a bird or rabbit. The Sussex Spaniel is generally a willing, eager-to-please dog breed. Bred to work in close cooperation with a human hunting companion, this breed is inclined to look for your cues. These attributes make a Sussex Spaniel relatively easy to train and suitable for manyfirst-time dog parents. Always usepositive reinforcementwithtraining treats,dog toys, and praise when training your Sussex Spaniel. Nose work Playing fetch Hunting Agility training Walking Hiking Dock diving Interactive toys and puzzle feeders The Sussex Spaniel’s brown coat is soft and thick, so plan on adaily brushingandfrequent baths. If you don’t mind taking care of these routine grooming needs, you’ll find the Sussex Spaniel to be a relatively easy-keeper, all things considered. Typically, the Sussex Spaniel has no particular skin care requirements. Silensky recommendsbathing your Sussex dogabout every other week. Keep a good-quality dog brush handy and give your Sussex Spaniel a daily brushing. This regular grooming will remove loose hair and reduce shedding, plus distribute oils through the coat. Lewis says the feathering on the dog’s ears, legs, and toes is especiallyprone to matting, so you’ll want to be diligent about keeping those areas combed and free of debris. Apin brushis a good choice for general use on the coat, but you might reach for aslicker brushif your dog is shedding considerably or you have serious detangling to do. In addition, you’ll want to trim your Sussex Spaniel’s fur regularly—about every other week. Silensky says trimming isn’t intense and mainly involves keeping feathering between the toes and around the feet in check. You can take your dog to a professional groomer for help. As you groom your Sussex Spaniel, check their eyes forrednessordischargethat might indicate an infection, and contact your veterinarian right away if you suspect a problem. Also be watchful for any change in the appearance of your dog’s eyes—an especially droopy lower eyelid can be a sign ofectropion, which can cause your dog’s eye to become dry and irritated. It’s important to keep your Sussex Spaniel’s ears clean and dry. Otherwise, their foldedears can develop an infection. If you notice odors or discharge from the ears, consult your veterinarian right away. Your vet can give you advice onhow to clean your dog’s earsand whichear-cleaning product to use. The ideal home for a Sussex Spaniel is with an active family who wants a loyal and affectionate companion for outdoor activities like hiking or hunting. While these sporting dogs are relatively compact and aren’t known for having a super high energy level, they’re not as well-suited for apartment life. “Sussex Spaniels need a nice yard to run around in and play in,” says Silensky. “Sussex Spaniels cannot be penned up in small spaces. ” You won’t have to fuss much over their grooming, but they should be brushed daily to keep their rich brown coat looking its best. Regular exercise will keep this sturdy dog’s weight in check, and you’ll want to keep their mind active with regular training sessions and games. If you can meet these needs and provide an abundance of affection, this little brown dog might be your ideal match. Because the Sussex Spaniel is eager to please and bond with their family, this dog breed makes a very good pet for new and experienced dog parents alike. “The breed has a calm nature that works well in most any household setting,” says Lewis. Compared to otherpopular dog breedsand even to other types of spaniels, the Sussex Spaniel is rare. These dogs are considered a preservation breed, which means breeders focus on the breed’s heritage characteristics and health rather than catering to what may be popular or in-demand for a pet. Sussex Spaniels are known for barking to communicate while hunting, and they might rely on this same mode of communication to alert or engage with you in casual, everyday scenarios. That said, Sussex Spaniels don’t have a reputation for nuisance barking at home. WRITTEN BY Erica Puisis Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians