SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/danish-swedish-farmdog

Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Adobe_stock/rolf_52  The newest dog breed recognized by the American Kennel Club (AKC) is the lively Danish-Swedish Farmdog, but the dogs aren’t a recent canine creation. According to thebreed standard, thesefriendly dogstrace their origins back to the 1700s, when they could be found in the U. , Germany, France, Denmark, and Sweden. For most of the breed’s history, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs lived as workers, taking on odd jobs around the family farm. Their impressive resume includes roles as mousers and ratters, livestock herders,hunting companions, and guardians. Their trainability made them a popular choice for circuses as well, where they served as cute clown sidekicks. As farming became less common over the centuries, so did the Danish-Swedish Farmdog. But thankfully, a partnership between the Danish and Swedish kennel clubs helped revive this special breed. Compact (at 15–20 pounds and 12. 5 inches tall) and somewhat rectangular in shape with a short, smooth coat, the Danish-Swedish Farmdog is often mistaken for a terrier, though they’re actually most closely related to pinschers like theDoberman. In fact, Farmdogs used to be called Danish Pinschers. Thanks to their size and friendly personality, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs can thrive in a variety of settings, provided they get plenty of exercise and companionship. While you don’t need to live on a farm to keep your Farmdog happily employed, you do need to provide them with a job. Luckily, you can trade ratting forrally, herding forhiking, and hunting forhide-and-seek. Energetic,intelligent, and playful, Farmdogs excel at learning new games. Farmdogs are highly affectionate and tend to love people of all ages—even strangers. When well-socialized, they also enjoy the company of other dogs. As you would expect from a dog built for farm chores, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs require minimal grooming, which leaves more time for playing. The Danish-Swedish Farmdog is a generally healthy dog with an average lifespan of 11–13 years. While no special health concerns have been reported, they may develop a few health issues common in small dogs. Periodontal disease, or gum disease, is a progressive condition in which bacteria accumulate in the mouth, damaging the dog’s gums, teeth, jaw bones, and other tissues. Signs of periodontal disease include: Red, irritated gums Drooling Bad breath Low appetite Facial swelling Discolored, loose, or missing teeth Root exposure Brushing your dog’s teethat home every day and keeping up with dental hygiene is the best way to prevent periodontal disease. Dogs who develop this condition might need tooth extractions if the disease is advanced. Annual dental cleaningsare the best way to prevent periodontal disease. When it slips (luxates) out of its normal position, this is referred to aspatellar luxation. It’s a common condition in small dogs like the Danish-Swedish Farmdog, and common signs include a limp and a gait that resembles a bunny hopping. Often, patellar luxation corrects itself, and the kneecap slides back into place. But severe cases may need surgery. Your vet may recommendanti-inflammatory medications,weight loss, exercise restriction, orjoint supplementsto manage the condition. Work with your veterinarian to choose the best dog food for your Danish-Swedish Farmdog. The food you select should: Meet the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) nutritional standards Be nutritionally complete for your dog’s lifestyle, size, and health Be formulated for your dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult, or senior) Most adult Danish-Swedish Farmdogs should eat two meals a day—once in the morning and again in the evening. Danish-Swedish Farmdog puppies, however, have a higher metabolism and may need up to four meals a day. Your vet can help you determine how often to feed your dog. Using puzzle feeders can help keep your dog mentally stimulated during meals. To determine how much to feed your dog, do two things: Look at thenutrition label on your dog’s food bag. This provides a general idea of how many calories your Farmdog needs, based on their weight. They can make a highly personalized recommendation based on your individual pup’s weight,body condition score, lifestyle, and health needs. Treats add up quickly, especially in small dogs. Be sure treats never make up more than 10% of your pup’s daily diet. Your Danish-Swedish Farmdog should receive all the nutrients they need if they eat a dog food that meets AAFCO standards. However, your veterinarian mayrecommend nutritional supplementsto treat or manage various health issues. Common supplements recommended by vets includeWelactin omega-3 fatty acidsfor healthy skin andFlexadinfor joint issues. Talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. Danish-Swedish Farmdogs tend to love two things: play and people. Their working dog/farmhand instincts and high energy reserves need to be addressed through daily physical and mental exercise, and through close companionship with their family. Bored, lonely Danish-Swedish Farmdogs with energy to spare are more likely to engage in unwanted behaviors likeexcessive barking. Their ancestors worked as watchdogs, and they have the pipes to prove it. Training can help reduce unwanted barking, but it’s important to keep your dog entertained and engaged to prevent this behavior. With a job history that includes hunting, it’s important to ensure that all outdoor exercise takes place eitheron a leashor within a securely fenced area. Otherwise, a Danish-Swedish Farmdog could easily follow their nose into trouble or run off after a squirrel or rabbit. Beginsocializingandtraining your Danish-Swedish Farmdog puppyas soon as you bring them home. Socialization involves introducing your pup to new animals, people, environments, activities, and objects with the goal of helping them feel more comfortable in new situations throughout their life. Ask your vet for age-appropriate socialization ideas. Danish-Swedish Farmdogs are impressively smart and trainable. Like all dogs, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs respond toconsistent, positive, rewards-based training. Training is also a great way to provide your pet with mental stimulation and physical exercise while building that important human-animal bond. Walking Jogging Hiking Swimming Agility Flyball Lure coursing Nose work Rally Hide-and-seek Fetch Obedience training Skills training  Other thanroutine nail trimmingand baths as needed, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs and their short, smooth fur require very little grooming. If your Danish-Swedish Farmdog spends a lot of time outdoors, you’ll want to regularly check for burrs, sticks, and other debris that can get stuck in their fur and irritate their skin. You’ll also want to keep an eye out for ticks and stay vigilant withyear-round flea and tick prevention. How often your Farmdog needs a bath depends on their lifestyle. Talk to your veterinarian abouthow often to bathe your dog. The Danish-Swedish Farmdog’s short fur isn’t prone to matting, and shedding is minimal. Occasional brushing should be enough to keep your dog looking and feeling their best. Farmdogs aren’t prone to eye issues. But if you noticeredness,discharge,cloudiness, or apparent vision changes, call your veterinarian. Danish-Swedish Farmdogs have ears that fold over like a flap, which can trap moisture and debris—especially if your Farmdog is a frequent swimmer. Call your vet if you noticesigns of an ear infection, such as redness, swelling, itching, discomfort, and a foul odor. Here are some questions to consider before adding a Danish-Swedish Farmdog to your family: Do I have the time and energy to provide a dog with physical and mental exercise each day? Can I keep a dog on a leash or within a fenced area when outdoors? Am I home enough to provide a dog with close companionship? Do I have the skills and patience to provide early socialization and lifelong training using positive reinforcement? Am I financially prepared to provide veterinary care? Can I provide a dog with a loving home for their lifetime, which could be 13 years or more? If you can answer these questions with an enthusiastic “Yes!” you may be ready to parent a Danish-Swedish Farmdog. The cost of a Danish-Swedish Farmdog varies by breeder, but you can generally expect to pay at least $3,000 for a puppy. The Danish-Swedish Farmdog Club of America maintains abreeder directorythat’s organized by region. True to their name, Danish-Swedish Farmdogs were developed to work as mousers and ratters, livestock herders, hunting companions, and watchdogs on farms. However, these affectionate dogs also excel at living as family companions, provided they get plenty of daily exercise. Yes, the Danish-Swedish Farmdog is arare dog breed in the United States. It’s estimated that there are fewer than 500 Farmdogs living in the U. WRITTEN BY Sarah Mouton Dowdy, MA Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians