SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/standard-poodle

Istock/ivanastar Standard Poodles are athletic and intelligent water dogs originally bred to hunt waterfowl. They have a soft, curly coat that comes in a variety of colors, including black, white, red, silver, brown, and parti-color (white with solid color patches). As medium-to-large dogs, a Standard Poodle’s size is 18–24 inches tall at the shoulder and 40–70 pounds. Standards are the largest of the threetypes of Poodles, which also includesMiniature PoodlesandToy Poodles. Poodles are generally a good-natured breed that makes awonderful family dog. They have a curly coat that has a long growth cycle, making themprone to matting. Regular and consistent grooming—both at home and by a professional groomer—will help keep their coat healthy and prevent tangles. Along with grooming, Standard Poodles alsorequire regular exerciseand training to keep their mind and body happy. The average Standard Poodle lifespan is 10–18 years. In general, the Standard Poodle is a healthy breed that’s not especially prone to many health problems. But as with all dogs, some issues may arise and require medical care. Reputable Standard Poodle breederswill screen their dogs for medical genetic conditions to produce healthy puppies. Still, pet parents may benefit frominvesting in pet insuranceearly in their dog’s life. Here are a few conditions pet parents should watch for. The large Standard Poodle size meanship dysplasiais a common issue. This is a genetic condition that happens when bones in the hip don’t form properly, causing a loose joint where the bones slip in and out of place. Hip dysplasia can lead to inflammation, scar tissue, pain, andarthritis. Schedule a vet appointment if you notice any signs of hip dysplasia, such aslimping, difficulty standing, and walking with a bunny-hopping gait. Hip dysplasia can be managed withweight management, diet changes, exercise, supplements,laser therapy, andmedications. Idiopathic epilepsyis a seizure disorder that can result in spastic muscle movements, loss of consciousness, and loss of bowel control. Seizurestypically last between one to two minutes. After the seizure resolves, dogs will be disoriented for a few minutes up to several hours. Standard Poodles with epilepsy usually begin having seizures between 2–5 years of age. Epilepsy and seizures can be controlled with medications prescribed by your veterinarian. Von Willebrand diseaseis a blood-clotting disorder that, while more common in Poodles, is rare overall. Von Willebrand disease makes blood slow to clot or makes the blood not clot at all. This can be dangerous if your dog needs surgery or becomes injured, but a DNA test can detect this condition in your Standard Poodle. Standard Poodles can have skin problems, such as: Skin infectionssecondary to allergies Sebaceous adenitis, an autoimmune condition that attacks the skin’s oil glands Sebaceous cysts, which are benign wart-like growths that don’t typically cause problems unless they become inflamed or injured. Your veterinarian should evaluate any concern with your Standard Poodle’s skin. Standard Poodles can developgastric dilatation-volvulus, a severe form ofbloat in dogs. This is when the dog’s stomach inflates with food and/or gas, then twists, cutting off blood flow to vital organs. GDV is a life-threatening emergency and dogs showing any of the following symptoms must see a veterinarian immediately: Distended stomach Excessive droolingandpanting Pacing and restlessness Retching without producing vomit Agastropexy surgerycan help prevent GDV by attaching the stomach to the dog’s abdomen wall. This procedure is often done on deep-chested dogs during theirspayorneuter surgery. Standard Poodles are athletic dogs who require a nutritionally complete diet meant for large breeds. If your Poodle exercises several hours a day, asport-type dietis recommended because it provides increased calories. There are also foods designed specifically for Poodles, includingRoyal Canin’s Breed Health adultandpuppy formulas. Talk to your vet to find thebest dog foodfor your Standard Poodle. Avoid feeding your dog human foods and table scraps to prevent gastrointestinal problems. It’s important to match the Standard Poodle’s calorie intake to their lifestyle and energy. Poodles have a very lean body type and are predisposed to arthritis caused by hip dysplasia, so it’s important not to overfeed them and to pay attention to themanufacturer’s recommendations on your dog food bag. Standard Poodles should be fed twice a day. Use aslow feeder bowlfor meals to prevent your dog from eating too quickly and putting themselves at risk for vomiting and bloat. Pet parents can further reduce the risk of bloat by: Restricting exercise an hour before and after meals Avoiding elevated dog food bowls Offering smaller meals throughout the day instead of one large meal While referring to the manufacturer’s feeding recommendations is a good starting point, your vet will give the best advice onhow much to feed your dog. The perfect amount of food depends on your Standard Poodle’s weight, age, lifestyle, and health. Pay attention to your Poodle’s weight andbody condition. As athletic dogs, they can use up their daily calories if they are always on the go, buttoo much weight gaincan increase their risk of pain from hip dysplasia or arthritis. Your vet can help you navigate this balancing act. Because Standard Poodles are prone to hip dysplasia, your veterinarian may recommend ajoint supplementcontaining glucosamine and chondroitin. Your vet can tell you their preferred brands; some popular choices includeDasuquinandGlycoFlex. Standard Poodles are generally kind andfriendly dogs, but they are very energetic and do best with lots of exercise and consistent training. They like having a job to do and are eager to please, making them highly trainable withpositive reinforcement. As long as your dog has an outlet for their energy, Standard Poodles typically do well with children. But know that a rambunctious Standard Poodle might be too energetic for small kiddos and, because of the breed’s large size, might accidentally knock over children during play. Always supervise children and pets when they’re together. A busy Standard Poodle is a happy Standard Poodle. These dogs are energetic and can become restless without an outlet, so make sure your dog gets at least one to two hours of exercise every day. Poodles are one of thesmartest dog breeds, so consistentmental stimulationis just as important as exercise. Offer your Standard Poodlepuzzle toys, take them onlong walks where they’re allowed to sniff around, and keep up with regular training exercises throughout the day. Bored Standard Poodles can develop unwanted behaviors likeexcessive barkingordiggingwhen they have too much pent-up energy. It’s also important toproperly socialize your Standard Poodle puppyto help them grow into a confident and well-mannered dog. Ask your veterinarian for socialization tips. The brainy Standard Poodle can learn new training cues and tricks quickly. Once your Poodle mastersbasic obedience training, work on more advanced training to keep your dog mentally stimulated and happy. This breed appreciates a challenge, and they thrive in dog sports likeagility,dock diving, andflyball. Agility Hunting Swimming Learning new tricks Flyball Dock diving Hiking Running One reason why Standard Poodles are a sought-after breed is because of their long, curly, allergy-friendly coat. It’s important to know that there’s no such thing as a completelyhypoallergenic dog, but all Poodles do shed less than many other dog breeds and can be a good fit for certain people who are allergic to dogs. However, despite not shedding much, the Standard Poodle coat requires a lot of upkeep and care. Standard Poodles need their hair brushed every day to prevent matting and tangles. Along with daily at-home care, you’ll need to have your Poodle professionally groomed every six to eight weeks to keep their fast-growing hair short enough to stay tangle-free. Bathe your dogwith adog-safe shampooevery month or so. Make sure you dry your Standard Poodle’s coat completely after each bath—if their hair is left damp, it can cause skin irritation. Use ahigh-velocity dryerif needed, or have bathing handled by a professional groomer. Poodles can have sensitive skin, so stay vigilant for changes and schedule a vet appointment if you notice anything out of the ordinary, like itchiness,redness, orflakiness. Most Poodles don’t require specific care for their eyes. That said, white Standard Poodles and those with light-colored fur can be prone totear staining. Usetear stain removers, such asOptixcare wipesor preventative supplements likeZesty Paws Tear Stain Bites, to prevent discoloration around your dog’s eyes. While tear stains can be normal, contact your vet if you notice unusual changes in your dog’s eyes, likecolored dischargeorredness. Standard Poodles areprone to ear infectionssecondary to allergies. Chat with your veterinarian if your dog’s ears become red, smelly, or waxy. To help prevent ear infections in your dog: Clean your dog’s earswith adog-safe cleaning solutionafter every bath and swimming session. Talk to your veterinarian if your Standard Poodle has recurring infections. This could be a telltale sign of an allergy. Standard Poodles need a home with active pet parents who have the time and energy to provide their dog with daily exercise and mental engagement. A good example is a home with multiple adults and/or older children who will spend their day playing with their dog. A fenced-in yard is ideal, but not essential. A family interested in advanced trick training or agility would be best for a Standard Poodle. These pups also require daily brushing and professional grooming every month or two to keep their coat healthy, which is another time and financial commitment that a new Poodle parent must be willing to make. Yes, Standard Poodles are generally good family dogs, as they are friendly and enjoy interacting with people. Yes, Standard Poodles are often regarded as one of the smartest dog breeds. The most obvious difference between the three types of Poodles is size: Standard Poodles: 22–27 inches at the shoulder Miniature Poodles: 13–15 inches at the shoulder Toy Poodles: 10 inches or less at the shoulder WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Emily Fassbaugh grew up in San Diego. She attended the University of California, Davis for both her undergraduate studies in Animal. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians