SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/mastiff

Istock/debibishop The massive Mastiff is anancient dog breedwith a rich history. Also known as the Old English Mastiff, the breed was discovered in Britain when the Romans invaded in 55–54 BCE, though there’s evidence of Mastiff-like dogs dating back to 2500 BCE, according toThe Mastiff Club of America (MCA). The dogs worked as hunters and guardians in Europe, and they eventuallycame to North America on the Mayflower. All these years later, the Mastiff is still apopular giant dog. 5 inches and up, with males commonly reaching 30 inches or more. A Mastiff’s weight is anywhere between 120 and 230 pounds, and they have a thick and well-muscled build. The Mastiff’s historical role as a guardian has carried into the present, as the breed remains loyal to and watchful over their families. This, paired with their patient and lovable nature, makes a Mastiff a wonderful companion. But bringing a giant-breed dog into a home is no small commitment, and early training andsocializationis essential to have a well-mannered Mastiff. Though they might look formidable, the Mastiff’s broad, wrinkled head features kind and lovable expressions that pet parents adore. When at home, most Mastiffs enjoy a couch potato lifestyle and tend to not have high energy needs. But don’t be fooled: If a someone new enters their home, they will instantly be on high alert. This is why socializing English Mastiff puppies is so important, so they can learn that new people aren’t something to be wary of. Their short, dense, moderately shedding coats don’t require a lot of grooming. But Mastiffs are known to beexcessive droolers, and pet parents need to keep a small towel handy for quick cleanups. Like other giant dogs, this breed generallyhas a shorter lifespan than small-breed dogs; the average Mastiff lifespan is just 6–10 years. To help produce healthy Mastiff puppies,responsible breedersscreen for the health conditions that commonly affect the breed. Investing in pet insurancemight be a good idea for pet parents looking to bring home a Mastiff puppy. Similar to humans, cats anddogs can experience seasonal allergiestriggered by environmental factors such as tree or grass pollen, dust, mold, and flea bites. These allergies often manifest asitchy skinorear infectionsbut can also cause runny andred eyes, arunny nose, orsneezing. Many pets are diagnosed with seasonal allergies based on their clinical signs, physical exam findings, and response to therapy. For others with more severe allergies, diagnosis is done by a veterinary dermatologist who can perform allergy testing and develop patient-specific therapies. Mastiffs can be predisposed to eye disorders, such as: Ectropion(when the eyelid rolls out away from the eye) Entropion(when the eyelid grows inward) Cataracts(clouding of the eye lens that can cause vision impairment) Progressive retinal atrophy(an inherited disease that leads to vision loss) In most cases of ectropion, entropion, and cataracts, veterinarians can diagnose and treat the dog with surgical intervention. PRA, however, cannot be treated, but it can be screened for with genetic testing. Mastiffs can be prone to developing cancer, specifically: Osteosarcoma Lymphoma Hemangiosarcoma Mast cell tumors Cancers in dogsmay present differently, fromlimpingor lameness to a smallgrowth on the skin. It’s important for a vet to evaluate any Mastiff dog showing signs of abnormal behavior or growths. Hip dysplasiais when the bones of the hip joints do not align appropriately. This causes rubbing and grinding of the bones that, over time, results in deterioration of the joint andosteoarthritis. Hip dysplasia can be a hereditary condition for Mastiffs, but it can also be exacerbated by other factors such as exercise habits, weight, and nutrition. This condition can be screened for withX-rays, and treatment will vary depending on the condition’s severity. Degenerative myelopathy (DM)is a progressive disease that causes hind limb weakness and paralysis due to degeneration of the spinal cord. The exact cause of DM is unknown, but some dogs carrying a certain genetic mutation seem to be prone to developing the disease. Signs of DM commonly start in middle-aged dogs with “knuckling” or hind-end weakness, which can look like swaying when standing still, or easily falling over or stumbling. Over time, this progresses to the inability to use the hind legs to stand or walk. Currently, there are no effective treatments for DM. Regular exercise andphysical therapyhave been shown to help in preserving muscle mass and quality of life for dogs with DM. Epilepsydescribes recurrent seizures without a known cause. The appearance of a seizure can vary widely—some affect only a small part of the body, while others affect the entire body. Mastiff pet parents need to be aware ofsigns of a seizure in dogs, including: Stiffening and falling over with shaking and vocalization Paddling of the limbs Loss of bladder and bowels Drooling Vomiting Seizures can last a few seconds to a few minutes while the dog is unaware of what is going on around them. Before and after the seizure, the pet may act abnormally as well, appearing anxious or confused, disoriented, or sleepy. Treatment is typically done with lifelong medications. But there’s good news: Once anti-seizure medication treatment begins, most pets live a fairly normal life. Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV)is a severe form ofbloat in dogsthat can affect any deep-chested breed—including the Mastiff. This happens when there’s a large amount of food and gas in the stomach, such as after a big meal. This buildup makes the stomach expand and prevents normal abdominal blood flow. The decreased blood flow causes a loss of blood to the stomach and, when combined with the high pressure from within, can lead to rupture. To prevent GDC and bloat, many deep-chested dogs undergo aprophylactic stomach tacking (gastropexy) surgeryto help prevent GDV, typically during their spay or neuter procedure. Even with this precaution in place, it’s important to know when your English Mastiff may be showing signs of GDV. Seek immediate veterinary care if you notice these signs: Distended abdomen Retching without producing any vomit General signs of abdominal pain, such as standing and stretching or drooling Collapse Selecting thebest dog foodfor your Mastiff comes down to the needs of the individual dog. Discuss your dog’s diet with your veterinarian, as they can make recommendations based on your pup’s specific medical history. In general, Mastiffs do well on a dog food that: MeetsAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) standards Is formulated for large dog breeds Is made for your dog’s current life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior) Mastiff puppies should be fed alarge-breed puppy food, thenswitch to an adult formulaonce they reach 18–24 months age. Talk to your veterinarian, who can help youchoose the best food for your dog. Mastiffs are deep-chested dogs, which means care must be taken to prevent gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) or bloat. Pet parents should: Feed their Mastiff two to three meals per day, instead of one big meal Restrict exercise for an hour before and after mealtimes Avoid elevated dog food bowls Useslow-feeder bowls Theamount you feed your dogdepends on the individual Mastiff, and it’s always best to talk with a veterinarian about your dog’s diet and nutritional needs. That said, Mastiffs need a lot of food because of their massive size, sobudget accordingly. For Mastiffs that have growth disorders affecting their joints, such as hip dysplasia, it can be beneficial to give themjoint supplementswith glucosamine and chondroitin to help keep their joints healthy. Omega-3 supplementsalso aid in protecting joint health, and keep their skin and coat healthy, too. Always talk to your veterinarian before adding anything new to your dog’s diet, including supplements. In the home, Mastiffs are generally patient andcalm dogs, but they spring into action as soon as they perceive a threat—even if it’s just the mail carrier walking by. Their gentle demeanor makes them suitable for families withchildren who understand how to interact with dogs, but Mastiffs may be best in homes without younger children, who may be easily knocked down by an accidental bump from these enormous dogs. But overall, Mastiffs are gentle giants and tend to do well with other pets, especially whenintroduced during puppyhood. Because they have been used as guardian dogs for centuries, Mastiffs can be instinctually reserved around strangers. Pet parents need to invest inearly trainingand socialization as soon as they bring home their Mastiff puppy. Despite their suspicions toward new people, Mastiffs don’t bark a lot, and they’re gentle with humans and animals they know. Mastiffs are eager to please, learn quickly, and respond well topositive reinforcement methodsthat make training fun. However, training sessions are best kept short to keep their attention and focus. Don’t hesitate to reach out to acertified dog trainerif you need help teaching your Mastiff the basics. Pulling carts Neighborhood walks Obedience Tracking Nose work Lounging on the couch When it comes to upkeep, a Mastiff’s short coat is pretty low-maintenance. The most effort will probably go toward managing their drool, which seems to flow endlessly from their droopy jowls. Pet parents find it helpful to always have a cloth at the ready to wipe their Mastiff’s face … and wipe off any drool that finds its way to the floor, walls, and furniture. If those adorable facial folds and jowls aren’t kept clean, Mastiffs can developskin infections. Pet parents need to wipe their Mastiff’s facial folds daily with a pet-safe facial wipe or damp paper towel to prevent buildup of moisture and debris. English Mastiffs have a short, dense coat and are moderate shedders. Weekly brushingwith agrooming mittorbristle brushreduces shedding, butbathing your dogis only really necessary every few months. Mastiffs may experience periods of heavy shedding once or twice a year. During these periods, they need to be brushed more frequently. Mastiffs are prone to numerouseye conditions,so pet parents need to monitor their eyes and contact a vet if any changes are noticed. Along with regular monitoring, a Mastiff’s eyes need to be cleaned routinely to helpprevent tear stainsand infections. Routine ear cleaningwith aveterinary-approved ear cleanseris important for keeping your Mastiff’s ear canals healthy. Their ears must be cleaned after they’re in water, such as after a bath or after swimming. Their generally lazy lifestyle makes the Mastiff a lovable companion. They are gentle and affectionate toward their families, but early socialization is vital to help prevent the protective behaviors for which English Mastiffs have been bred for thousands of years. Well-trained, well-socialized Mastiffs are truly gentle giants and do well with other animals as well as children. But these pups are sometimes unaware of their giant size, which can be problematic for smaller animals and young children. Before bringing home a Mastiff puppy, consider your space and budget. Mastiffs need lots of room to exist comfortably; you probably don’t want to be navigating around one in a 500-square-foot apartment. Big dogs like Mastiffs also require much more food than smaller breeds, and that comes at a significant cost. The average Mastiff lifespan is 6–10 years. Female Mastiffs typically weigh 120–170 pounds, and it’s not uncommon for males to exceed 200 pounds. According to the MCA, the largest Mastiff on record was a male named Zorba, who weighed a whopping 343 pounds. Yes, Mastiffs aregreat family dogs, and their calm nature is suitable for homes with children who understand how to appropriately interact with pets. However, they may be best suited in homes without toddlers or babies, as their massive size can be dangerous. All interactions with children and dogs of any breed should be supervised. Bullmastiffsare related to Mastiffs, but they are a separate breed that was created by crossing Mastiffs withBulldogs. Because of this, Bullmastiffs are smaller than Mastiffs. While Mastiffs can weigh 120–230 pounds, Bullmastiffs typically weigh 100–130 pounds. Teresa Kho-Pelfrey graduated from Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine in 2015 and completed her clinical year at Purdue. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians