SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/general-health/dog-allergic-reaction

Chewy   Allergic reactions in dogs occur when the immune system overreacts to what should be an innocuous stimulus called an allergen, such as pollen, food, an insect sting, or medication. A dog’s allergic reaction can range from mild, such as a little itching, to severe and life-threatening, like anaphylaxis. Recognizing the early signs of a dangerous allergic reaction in dogs—such as facial swelling, vomiting, excessive scratching, or difficulty breathing—can help you act quickly and protect your dog’s health. If you think your dog is having ananaphylactic reaction, seek immediate veterinary attention. Dogs can be allergic to a wide range of triggers, including: Environmental allergens: Pollen, dust mites, mold, and grass Bug bites or stings: Fleas, mites, bees, spiders, and mosquitoes Food ingredients: Common proteins like chicken, beef, and dairy Medications or vaccines: Some dogs react to specific drugs Contact allergens: Chemicals, materials, or plants that touch the skin  Knowing the signs of an allergic reaction in dogs and understanding what your next steps should be will help immensely in your pup's time of need. Recognizing the signs as quickly as possible ensures you can provide immediate medical attention if necessary. Here’s what to look for to determine if your dog is having an allergic reaction: Itchy skin is the most common symptom of allergic reactions in dogs. Although itching can occur anywhere, common areas affected by allergies include the face/head, ears, paws, belly, skin folds, and hind end. When adog is itchy, excessively scratching, licking, or rubbing the skin can damage the skin barrier. This creates an ideal environment for bacteria and yeast—organisms that normally live on the skin in small numbers—to multiply and cause infections. This can result in more scratching or licking, which can lead to further skin damage such as abrasions or open wounds. Just about any underlying cause of an allergic reaction can cause itchiness and excessive scratching in dogs. You have to treat the symptoms and the underlying cause for the itch to stop. Treatment may include: Avoidance and hyposensitization: Whenever possible, it’s best to avoid contact with what triggers a dog’s allergic reaction (a specific drug, for example). When avoidance isn’t realistic, as is the case withseasonal allergiestopollenorgrass, hyposensitization (immunotherapy or allergy shots) can be a good option. Flea and tick prevention: Fleas bites can make any dog itchy, but the scratching and biting can be extreme indogs with flea allergies. Make sure your pup does not havefleasand is on a routine,vet-recommended flea and tick medication for dogs, likeCredelioorNexGard. Anti-itch medications: Prescription medications likeZenreliaare used to manage allergic itching. A single daily dose of Zenrelia can help to quickly relieve itching in dogs over 12 months. Other options includeprednisone,Atopica,Apoquel, andCytopoint. Diet change:Food allergiesare managed with a diet that doesn’t contain the dog’s specific allergen, which is typically a protein, or that is made with hydrolyzed proteins likePurina Pro Plan Veterinary Diets HA Hydrolyzed Chicken Flavor Dry Dog Food. Nutritional supplements and antihistamines: Omega-3 fatty acids likeNutramax Welactin Omega-3 Fish Oiland antihistamines, includingPetArmor Antihistamine Medication for Allergies for Dogs, are enough on their own, but can be helpful when combined with other treatments for allergies in dogs. Health Tools Provide a few details about what’s going on, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will quickly help you find out what to do next. Provide a few details about what’s going on, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will quickly help you find out what to do next. Hivesare raised red welts on a dog’s skin, most often caused by an allergic reaction. They can develop anywhere on the body but are most commonly seen on the face, legs, back, and sides. Hives can last from seconds to hours and may appear and disappear quickly. They are usually itchy, though some seem to cause little irritation. In dogs with thick or extra-hairy coats, hives may look different—appearing as patches of raised fur rather than visible red skin, since the inflammation is hidden beneath the coat. As long as there are no other symptoms, persistent hives should be treated by: Bathing your dog to remove any possible allergen Taking your dog to the vet for a checkup, where they will likely give medication, such asprednisoneor an antihistamine, to lessen the immune system response  A dose of oralBenadryl(diphenhydramine) can be helpful if your vet says it’s OK for your dog. An allergic reaction can also cause facial swelling. Typically, this swelling occurs around the: Eyes Ears Nose Muzzle It’s important to note that facial swelling can quickly progress to breathing problems if the throat becomes swollen as well. Any change in your dog’s breathing warrants an emergency vet visit. Most commonly, facial swelling is caused by an allergic reaction to: Bee stings Bug bites Certain foods Toxin exposure Medications Vaccinations Mild facial swelling is treated similarly to hives, with both topical remedies and oral medications, but severe cases require immediate veterinary support and injectable medications. Stomach upsetcan be associated with afood allergy, but it may also be seen with other potential allergens. Dogs usually have itchy skin as well as symptoms of stomach upset like: Vomiting Diarrhea Decreased or total loss of appetite Proteins are usually the culprit in food allergies, withchicken, beef, anddairybeing the most common. Food allergies are treated long-term with a hypoallergenic diet using a novel-protein,limited-ingredient, orhydrolyzed dog food. Your veterinarian may also recommend probiotics, antibiotics, or antinausea medications to treat the symptoms. Vomiting and diarrhea can also be a symptom ofanaphylaxis, which is life-threatening and should be treated immediately. Common respiratory symptoms of an allergic reaction in dogs include: Sneezing Coughing Wheezing Lethargy Trouble breathing These symptoms often arise from inhaled allergens, such as those associated with environmental allergies to pollen or mold. Sneezing, coughing, and wheezing often come first and can lead to trouble breathing. Noisy or labored breathing can also be seen, especially inbrachycephalic (smoosh-faced) dog breeds. If your dog is having respiratory symptoms, take them to the veterinarian. And if they’re having trouble breathing, take them to the nearest emergency vet. Oxygen therapy, steroid injections, and other injectable medications are often needed to treat these symptoms of an allergic reaction in dogs. Allergic reactions can range from mild to life-threatening—the most severe being anaphylaxis. During anaphylaxis, the immune system is stimulated to produce histamines and other dangerous inflammatory chemicals that can cause the body to go into shock. These substances have a widespread effect on many areas of a dog’s body, including: Cardiovascular and respiratory systems Stomach and intestinal tract Skin Nervous system Eyes Symptoms of anaphylaxis include: Pale or blue gums Lethargy Weakness or collapse Tremors Loss of consciousness Cardiac arrest Low blood pressure Difficulty/labored breathing Vomiting Loss of bowel/bladder control Anaphylaxis can be caused by any allergen and can happen in any dog. It can occur within minutes and is a serious medical emergency that needs to be treated right away. Veterinarians may treat anaphylaxis with IV fluids, a breathing tube, oxygen therapy, and IV medications like epinephrine, dexamethasone, and more. Allergic reactions in dogs are treated in a variety of ways, depending on the underlying cause and the symptoms. Treatments may include: Antihistamines: Antihistamines are used for mild allergic reactions (e. Medicated topical products: Shampoos, wipes, mousse, and sprays containing anti-inflammatory, antibiotic, antifungal, and soothing properties can be helpful for allergic reactions causing itchy skin. Allergy medication:Zenrelia,Atopica, andApoquelare effective oral medications that can help treat environmental allergies. Steroid medication: Prednisone is a common oral medication, whiledexamethasoneis more commonly given as an injection. Both are used for their anti-inflammatory effects and their immune suppression. IV fluids and injectable medications: Epinephrine can be used for anaphylaxis. Antibiotics:Cephalexin, Convenia, or other antibiotics can be used for a skin infection. Supplements:Probioticscan be used to help support gut and skin health andomega-3 fatty acidshave proven anti-inflammatory effects. Flea and tick prevention medications: Routine, year-roundflea and tick preventionhelps prevent itchy skin and allergic reactions for dogs allergic to fleas. Cool compress: This can be used for insect bites or bee stings. Ways to help prevent allergic reactions in dogs at home depend on the allergen that stimulated the reaction. Identifying and removing allergy triggers is the most important step to preventing future allergic reactions. And intradermalallergy testingis the best way to determine which environmental allergens your dog is allergic to. This is done by a veterinary dermatologist, and they use the results to make a special allergy vaccine to prevent allergic reactions in your dog. Unfortunately, allergy testing is only for environmental allergies, not food allergies. Other types of allergy testing—including blood, hair, and saliva testing in dogs—is not accurate. Here are some ways to help prevent allergies in your dog: If your dog reacts to pollen, wipe them down with dog-friendly wipes after outdoor walks—especially the paws, where dogs tend to lick. Use HEPA air filters, likeHoneywell filters, to reduce indoor allergens. Ensure your dog is on a year-round flea and tick prevention. This helps prevent itchy skin and allergic reactions in dogs allergic to fleas. Document anaphylactic reactions in your dog’s medical record, and going forward, take proper precautions with medications andvaccines. If you notice a mild allergic reaction, such as itching or hives, and your pup is not having stomach upset or respiratory problems,giving them a dose of oral Benadrylcan be helpful. But always check with your vet first. Keep in mind that injectable medications work faster than oral medications for allergic reactions. Mild reactions can resolve in minutes to hours once the trigger is gone. Long-term allergies last until the source is identified and managed. Bathing your dog with an appropriate shampoo can help to remove the triggers of an allergic reaction on the skin. Your veterinarian might recommend giving oral medications at home, such as antihistamines, but severe reactions require veterinary treatment. Yes, dogs can experience anaphylaxis from severe allergies. If your dog has experienced a severe allergic reaction, they should be monitored carefully as it could happen again if the trigger is not identified. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Barri Morrison was born and raised and currently resides in Ft. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians