SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/chinook

Istock/Robbie Ross In the early 1900s, explorer and sled dog-driver Arthur Walden created the Chinook (pronounced Sha-Nook) in New Hampshire by breeding aSiberian Huskywith a “Mastiff-type dog,” according to theChinook Club of America (CCA). Chinook dogs have a dense double coat that lies close to the body to keep them well insulated, so thesedogs do well in cold climates. They are also known for their muscular body, webbed paws, and saber tails—all traits that helped the breed excel as sled dogs. Chinooks stand 22–26 inches at the shoulder and weigh 50–90 pounds. Chinooks are sweet-tempered dogs that are hardworking and devoted to their loved ones. They are extremely athletic and need to be given jobs to do—such as sled-pulling—to burn off energy and keep themmentally stimulated. They require a moderate amount of grooming due to the shedding of their coat. Weekly brushing works well for most of the year, but in spring and fall when they shed more, this breed requires brushing twice a week. Chinooks are typicallyextremely healthy dogswith an average life expectancy of 12–15 years. However, they are at risk for a few medical conditions. Hip dysplasiais a hereditary orthopedic condition that can occur in one or both hip joints, where the hip joint doesn’t align properly as the dog grows. This can cause pain and, over time,arthritis. Some Chinook puppies are born with congenital hip dysplasia, though this is rare. Most affected dogs develop this conditionduring their senior years. Symptoms include: Lameness Slowness to rise when lying down “Bunny-hopping” gait when running Reluctance to run, jump, or go up or down stairs Holding the affected leg out to the side when sitting up Typically, the condition can be managed withjoint supplementsand certain medications. But in serious cases,hip dysplasia surgerymay be necessary. Cryptorchidism in dogsis an inherited medical condition that occurs when one or both testicles do not descend into the scrotum by 8 weeks of age in some males. The retained testicle(s) either remain in the abdomen or can be felt in the groin region. However, it’s important to wait until a Chinook puppy is at least 6 months old to fully diagnose this condition. The retained testicle may still descend into the scrotum between 8–24 weeks of age. But if both testicles are not palpable in the scrotum by 24 weeks of age, then cryptorchidism is definitively diagnosed. Undescended testes are at a higher risk of testicular cancer, but cryptorchidism is treatable byneutering your dogwhen they’re around 1 year old. Chinooks that are cryptorchid should not be bred so the condition isn’t passed down to puppies. Chinooks are also at risk for a rare movement disorder calledparoxysmal dystonia. This inherited condition causes muscles to tense up and tremor while a Chinook is still conscious. Tremoring episodes may last up to an hour. Once an episode ends, the affected Chinook appears to be back to normal, but the tremoring episodes continue to occur randomly. There is no treatment for this condition. Chinook puppies should be fed alarge-breed, high-quality puppy formulauntil they are 1 year old. Once they reach maturity, they need to be transitioned to alarge-breed, high-quality adult dog food. Choosing a food that meets theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)standards for nutrition is a great starting point forchoosing the best dog foodfor your Chinook, and your veterinarian can help you narrow your options. Chinooks do well with twice-daily feedings, in the morning and evening. If your dog eats quickly, a slow-feeder bowl is recommended to slow down their food intake. Like all dogs, Chinooks should always be fed a diet that matches their life stage (puppy, adult, orsenior), and no more than 10% of their daily diet should consist of treats. Chinook puppies have rapid growth spurts, which means it’s important to feed them large-breed puppy food when they are less than 1 year old to provide the extra calories they need to grow. Follow the feeding guidelines on the back of the bag of the puppy formula, which takes into account your dog’s age and expected body weight. Once a Chinook is 1 year old, transition them to a large-breed adult formula that has fewer calories to preventunwanted weight gain. Talk with your veterinarian to find outhow much to feed your dogbased on the health, lifestyle, and age of your Chinook. A healthy Chinook dog that’s fed an AAFCO-compliant dog food shouldn’t need supplementation. However, there are instances where a veterinarian may recommendsupplements for your dog. For example, if your Chinook has hip dysplasia, your vet may suggest anomega-3 fatty acid supplementand a joint supplement to slow down arthritis in the hip joints. Talk with your veterinarian to find out if your dog would benefit from a supplement. Every dog is an individual with their own personality, but the typical Chinook temperament is loving, playful, and eager to please their family members, according to thebreed club. They have high energy requirements and do best when given a job to do, such asrunning,hiking, herding, or otherdog sporting events. They can bewonderful family dogs, as they are loving around children they know and thrive when they’re with otherdogs when properly introduced. Chinooks enjoy the company of their family members and other dogs. In fact, the breed can developseparation anxietyif they’re left alone for too long. It may be beneficial tohire a pet sitterto check in on your dog if you’ll be away. A bored and lonely Chinook dog may turn todestructive tendencies, such as diggingtheir way out of the yard. Attention, exercise, and stimulation are key to keeping this active and alert dog happy. Chinooks aresmart dogsand generally easy to train. As with all dog breeds, Chinook puppies should participate insocializationandtraining classesstarting as early as 8–12 weeks of age to allow them to mature into well-behaved dogs. Giving themhigh-value treatswhen they are behaving well and following your cues is the best way to train Chinook puppies. This training tactic is calledpositive reinforcement. Herding Hiking Obedience training Long walksor runs Pulling sleds or carts Being around children Bikejoring Tracking AKC Rally® Agility The Chinook dog breed has a soft, double coat that sheds throughout the year—but more heavily in the spring and fall. Their coat requires a moderate amount of grooming for upkeep. The typical Chinook doesn’t require specialized skin care. Regular bathingis recommended when their coat becomes dirty or smelly. Weekly brushingwill keep a Chinook’s medium-length coat free of tangles and debris. But during the heavy shedding seasons (specifically spring and fall), daily brushing is recommended to help remove the undercoat more efficiently. There are no special eye care requirements for this breed. Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision, such asrednessordischarge. Chinooks can occasionally developear infections. Cleaning their earswith avet-recommended ear cleaner, such asEpi-Otic® Advanced, every three to four weeks for maintenance can help their ears stay healthy. Chinooks are extremely athletic working dogs that do best living with an active family. They need at least two hours of exercise every day, which can consist of running, walking, hiking, participating in dog sporting events, and playing with their housemates. They are happiest when given a job to do. They also enjoy the companionship of other dogs, people, and children. For this reason, their perfect home would be with a family on a farm, or in a large home with a fenced yard where they can run and play with other dogs or herd other animals. Chinook dogs don’t do well in a home where they are the only pet and where their family members are gone for extended periods of time. They’re known to be destructive if left alone and bored. Their coat needs at least a weekly brushing to minimize shedding and matting, but daily brushing is crucial during spring and fall shedding seasons. Due to their intelligence, training a Chinook can be a breeze if they are given positive reinforcement, and an opportunity to participate in both socialization and puppy training classes. Chinooks are an extremelyrare dog breed, withfewer than 150 Chinook puppies borneach year. While all dogs bark, Chinooks are not considered excessive barkers. However, they will bark to alert their family if someone unfamiliar—like a mail carrier—is approaching. Yes, Chinooks can make excellent family dogs because they are playful and social. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian I live in Raleigh, North Carolina. I obtained by BS degree in Biology at UNC-Chapel Hill in 2000 and my DVM degree at NCSU in 2006. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians