SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/caucasian-shepherd-dog

Kaitlyn Arford The Caucasian Shepherd’s guardian history and natural independence make them an alert working dog. However, this breed might not be the perfect choice for a first-time pet parent for the same reasons. Caucasian Shepherds, also called Caucasian Ovcharkas, hail from Eastern Europe and, according to theCaucasian Shepherd Club of America (CSCA), were originally intended to protect livestock and properties from predators in the Caucasus Mountains in Georgia. The breed is also referred to by other names, including Caucasian Mountain Dog and Russian Bear Dog. Before bringing home a Caucasian Shepherd puppy, know that that little fluff ball will grow to be massive. Caucasian Shepherds are 100 poundsat a minimum, and they can reach up to 170 pounds. Standing 23–30 inches tall, these large dogs need a home with ample space. But it’s not just their size that potential pet parents need to consider. A Caucasian Shepherd puppy will need lots of obedience training with positive reinforcement techniques. This breed isn’t known for patience—and small, hyper children might not be compatible cohabitators,according to the breed club. Caucasian Shepherds also aren’t happy about new people coming into their home. So, if you’re searching for more of a gentle giant, look elsewhere—perhaps at aNewfoundlandorSaint Bernard. If you and your home can handle their personality and needs, Caucasian Shepherds are relatively healthy dogs. That said, because of their size,they do have a short lifespan; most live 10–12 years. Dogs with entropionhave an eyelid that grows inward. This is an inherited condition that can affect a dog’s eyesight. Symptoms of entropion occur when the eyelashes rub on the eye’s surface because of the inward-folding eyelid and includeexcessive tear production,eye discharge, and redness. This can be a painful condition, and dogs may rub or paw at their affected eye. Fortunately, entropion can be corrected with surgery. Large-breed dogs such as Caucasian Shepherds are susceptible toelbow dysplasiaandhip dysplasia. Caused by abnormal bone growth and development, this condition results in a loose joint, which can impact a dog’s mobility, cause pain, and lead toarthritis. Signs of dysplasia include limping, lameness, popping joints, and trouble walking, standing, or sitting. Dogs may not be able to jump or use stairs. Treatment depends on the dysplasia’s severity and can range fromjoint supplementsto weight management to surgery. Caucasian Shepherds need to eat awell-balanced dog foodthat’s appropriate for their current life stage (puppy, adult, or senior). Choose a dog food that follows thenutritional guidelines approved by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Some go-to options includeRoyal Canin®/MD,Hills, andPurina®. Caucasian Shepherd puppies need to eat apuppy food for large-breed dogsto keep up with their rapid growth and development. Caucasian Shepherd puppies should eat three to four small meals every day on aregular feeding schedule. Once they reach adulthood, they can eat twice per day. If your dog eats too quickly, use aslow feeder bowl. Along with scheduled meals, make sure your Caucasian Shepherd has water available 24/7 so he can drink as needed. Because Caucasian Shepherds are at risk of hip and elbow dysplasia, they will need to eat lean their whole life, according to theCaucasian Shepherd Club of America. Follow the guidance on your dog food bag for portion sizes, and chat with your veterinarian about how much your dog should be eating. If yourCaucasian Shepherd becomes obese, work with a veterinarian to bring the pup’s weight down to a healthy level. This may include increasing his exercise, reducing meal sizes, orprescription dog food. Typically, Caucasian Shepherds don’t need special dietary foods or supplements unless your veterinarian recommends them. But because these dogs can have joint problems, your vet might recommend joint supplements. Caucasian Shepherd Dogs are very loyal to their humans, but they are also strikingly independent. These dogs are not the best choice for a first-time dog parent and are best suited to a home where they have room to roam safely within a fenced area. Because of this working dog’s independent nature, many Caucasian Shepherds prefer to be the only pet in the home. They also do best in homes without young children, as they don’t do well with kiddos pulling their tail or climbing on them. Historically, this breed has been protective and naturally suspicious around strangers. If you travel a lot, a Caucasian Shepherd will find it difficult to be boarded or even to be cared for by a pet sitter. The breed thrives in a quiet, calm environment with a homebody pet parent. Make sure you have time to dedicate to your Caucasian Shepherd puppy when you bring them home. Puppies need lots of slow exposure to new sounds, places, situations, and people to become socialized,according to the breed club. Always use positive reinforcement when training your Caucasian Shepherd. Obedience training Scent work Agility Fetch Tug-of-war Caucasian Shepherds have a thick double coat that needs regular grooming. The double coat and their large size mean this breed has alotof fur, and even just a simple brushing can take a lot of time. Caucasian Shepherds don’t have specific skin care needs. However, if you notice bleeding, bald spots, orexcessive scratching, contact your veterinarian. Caucasian Shepherds have a medium-length coat that comes in colors including gray, black, fawn, white, cream, and brindle. This fur sheds a lot throughout the year, especially in the spring and fall. Regular brushing will help you keep up with loose hairs, so block off grooming time in your schedule at least once a week. Because Caucasian Shepherds can have eyelid issues, monitor your dog for signs of irritation or pain. If you notice changes in how your dog’s eyes look or if your pup begins pawing at his face, take him to the vet. It’s important to keep your dog’s ears clean and dry. Use adog-specific cleanserto regularlyclean your dog’s ears, and contact your vet if you notice odor, redness, or discharge. The ideal home for a Caucasian Shepherd is one without children or other pets; with a human parent who is home often; and with a yard secured with a 6-foot-tall fence. These powerful dogs need an experienced pet parent to guide them, as Caucasian Shepherds are aloof with strangers and will distrust new people in their home. But if you can handle their size, independence, and grooming upkeep, a Caucasian Shepherd will be an enduringly loyal companion. Featured Image: Adobe/Ricant Images How much you’ll pay to purchase or adopt a Caucasian Shepherd depends on many factors, from the breeder to your location to the puppy’s bloodline. Typically, you can expect to pay $1,000–$2,500. The CSCAprovides guidance on approved breedersfor Caucasian Shepherd puppies. Caucasian Shepherds are sometimes confused withTibetan Mastiffs, as the breeds have similar characteristics. But because they can reach 170 pounds, Caucasian Shepherds are larger than Tibetan Mastiffs, which typically top out around 150 pounds. And while Caucasian Shepherds are an Eastern European breed, Tibetan Mastiffs have Asian origins. Yes, owning a Caucasian Shepherd is legal in the United States. WRITTEN BY Kaitlyn Arford Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians