SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/german-shepherd

Adobe_stock/SashaFoxWalters German Shepherds are large, agile, muscular,highly intelligent, and loyal dogs. These attributes make them one of themost popular dog breeds in the U. As part of the herding group, German Shepherds are high-energy and love having a job or an outlet for regular exercise. They are known for their confidence and bravery, as well as their ability to thrive with expert levels ofdog training and obedience. In fact, German Shepherds are commonly used as working dogs in the military and police for patrolling, bomb sniffing, andsearch and rescue. Thislarge dog breedhas an average weight ranging from 50–90 pounds. They are typically 22–26 inches tall. German Shepherd dogs are incredibly active and require training and regular exercise to keep them out of trouble. They are best for active families and experienced pet parents who can handle their energy level. It also helps if pet parents understandhow to socialize a puppy. Socialization, along with consistent training, is essential for German Shepherd puppies so they grow into confident and well-mannered dogs. German Shepherds are an active and athletic breed that require one to two hours of exercise every day for their physical and mental health. Without ample exercise andmental stimulation, they will develop unfavorable behaviors due to irritation and pent-up energy. German Shepherds have a double coat that sheds a lot. They will also typically go through two periods of excessive shedding each year (in the spring and fall), when extra grooming is required. The German Shepherd temperament varies by individual, as breed only makes upabout 9% of a dog’s behavior. But with their history as herders and guardians, you can expect your German Shepherd to be a loyal and alert dog. They are known to be gentle around their family but may bereserved around strangers. Yes, German Shepherds are good with kids if they are appropriately trained and well-socialized. It’s equally as important thatchildren are taught the appropriate ways to engage with dogs. Make sure all interactions between dogs and kids are supervised. Because of their historical roots, German Shepherdshave a strong driveand should bekept on a leashor inside afenced-in yardat all times when outside. Otherwise, they may dart after a squirrel, rabbit, or cat. It’s crucial to start socializing your new German Shepherd puppy with other dogs and have them enrolled in obedience training classes. This helps you build the right foundation for your puppy to evolve into a well-adapted and well-mannered adult dog. As one of the mostsmartest dog breeds, German Shepherds thrive on consistency,positive reinforcement, and a reward system, such astreatsor toys to help strengthen the human-animal bond. But because of their energy and intelligence, this breed might be a better fit for experienced dog parents who have experience training dogs. Don’t hesitate to reach out to acertified dog trainerfor extra help, if needed. Herding Agility Tracking Hiking Nose work Dock diving The averageGerman Shepherd lifespanis 7–10 years, and they are prone to several health problems. Purchasingpet insurance for your dogmay be a smart investment when you bring home a German Shepherd puppy. Reputable German Shepherd breeders will screen their dogs for genetic conditions before breeding. If you’re adopting through aGerman Shepherd rescueor local shelter, ask for all available health information on your dog. Degenerative myelopathyis a neurologic disorder that affects the spinal cord, slowly causing paralysis of the back legs. Early signs of degenerative myelopathy include weakness in the hind end and difficulty standing up. There’s no treatment for this condition, butphysical therapycan help strengthen muscles and protect a dog’s ability to use their legs. Elbow dysplasiais a degenerative joint disease that can cause lifelong pain in the front limbs. Hip dysplasiais another degenerative joint disease that affects the hind end. According to theCanine Health Information Center, about 20% of German Shepherds have hip dysplasia. Clinical signs of both conditions include limping, decreased range of motion, and othersigns of pain—especially later in life, asarthritissets in because of this disease process. The treatment for all degenerative joint diseases includesweight loss, reduced activity,joint supplements, anti-inflammatory andpain medications, orsurgery. There is testing available, such as thePennHIP, that can predict your German Shepherd’s risk of developing dysplasia during their lifetime. Cancer can developin German Shepherds at any age, but it usually occurs later in life. Common cancers include: Hemangiosarcoma(a malignant tumor most often detected in blood-rich organs such as the spleen and the heart) Bone cancer Lung cancer Intestinal cancers Depending on the extent of the cancer, treatment plans can includechemotherapy, radiation, surgery, orpalliative care. Gastric dilation-volvulus (GDV)is a sudden life-threatening condition when the stomach enlarges with gas (bloat) and then twists upon itself (GDV). This happens most commonly in deep-chested, large-breed dogs—including German Shepherds. Pet parents must be aware of the signs of bloat and GDV, as this is a medical emergency and immediate medical intervention is key to saving your dog’s life. Take your dog to the vet immediately if you notice: Distended stomach Abdominal pain (ex. whining with or without touching their belly) Restlessness/pacing Retching without producing vomit (dry heaving) Collapse One way to help prevent your German Shepherd dog from developing life-threatening GDV is via agastropexy procedure, when the stomach is permanently attached to the body wall. This prevents the stomach from twisting, and it’s often done during adog’s spayorneuter surgery. Allergiesin German Shepherds can be first seen with symptoms such as itchy skin,skin infections,ear infections, or digestive upset such asvomiting,diarrhea, orweight loss. A thorough medical history, physical examination, diagnostic testing of skin and ears,blood work, andfecal testsmay be recommended if you suspect that your dog has allergies. Heart disease, specificallydilated cardiomyopathy(DCM), valvular disease, andheart murmurs, can be common in German Shepherds. It’s important to have your dog’s heart evaluated during theiryearly physical exam. The treatment plan for a dog diagnosed with heart disease typically includes medications that help increase the heart’s pumping ability and managearrhythmias (irregular heartbeat). A special diet may also be considered to restrict sodium intake and increase the amount of certain amino acids that promote heart health. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI)is a digestive health issue that occurs when the cells of the pancreas do not produce enzymes and hormones normally. The most common symptom is weight loss, despite your pet having a ravenous appetite. Other symptoms of EPI include soft stools or diarrhea, excessive gas, thedesire to eat fecesandother unusual objects, flaky skin, or rough coat. Unfortunately, there’s no cure for EPI in dogs. Once the pancreas is damaged to the point that symptoms of EPI develop, you must give your dog lifelong pancreatic enzyme supplements. But, with proper management, your dog can still live a happy life with this condition. Pannus, or superficial keratitis, is a painful eye condition that can cause blindness if not managed. It occurs more often in dogs that live at high altitudes, those with increased exposure to UV light, and in areas with severe air pollution. Keeping your German Shepherd indoors during the sunniest part of the day, providing a shelter, or trying a specialty pair of dog goggles may be helpful in preventing this issue. German Shepherds require a high-quality, age-appropriate diet tomeet their nutritional needs. These diets are usually labeledpuppy,adult, orsenior. Alarge-breed puppyor adult food may be appropriate, and some brands even makedog food specifically for German Shepherd puppiesandadults. It’s highly recommended that all dogs eat a diet that meets the nutritional standards set by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Basic vitamins and mineral supplements are typically not needed if your dog’s food is AAFCO-compliant. Avoid offering your German Shepherdtable scraps, as they can cause stomach upset. Human foods also have a much higher fat content than dog food and can causepancreatitisandobesity. In general, German Shepherdpuppies should be fed three to four timesper day, and adult dogs should be fed twice a day. How much you feed is determined by the specific food your dog eats, as well as their lifestyle and health. Work with your veterinarian to determinehow much food your dog should eat. Talk to your veterinarian about when your German Shepherd puppy shouldswitch to adult food. This typically happens when your dog is 12–18 months old. To limit the risk of GDV, German Shepherds should not exercise for an hour before or after eating. Feeding smaller, frequent meals (instead of one big meal every day) will also help prevent bloat and GDV, as will using aslow-feeder bowl. A dog eating an AAFCO-compliant diet will receive all the nutrients they need. But sometimes your vet might recommend supplementation, depending on your dog’s health. Vets may recommend joint supplements orprobiotics for your dog, such asPurina Calming CareorFortiFlora. A German Shepherd’s undercoat is soft, yet the outer coat is tight, rough, and heavy. This breed sheds a lot and needs lots of at-home grooming. German Shepherds only need abath a few times a year. During their high-shedding periods (in the spring and fall), baths withdog shampoocan help decrease the hair around your home. Excessive bathing should be avoided because it often strips the coat of its natural oils, which protect the skin and the undercoat. Brush your dogevery day with apin brush. German Shepherds shed a lot, but frequent brushing can help reduce the amount of hair that ends up on your floor and furniture. Because German Shepherds can be predisposed to eye issues, it’s important to monitor your dog’s eyes for changes. This is especially important if you live at a high altitude or where there’s a very high UV ray index. Contact your vet if you notice changes in your dog’s eyes or vision. While it’s important tokeep your dog’s ears clean, ear cleanings should only be done if there is an issue or visible debris in the ear. Adding excessive moisture to a dog’s ear by bathing frequently, swimming, or using ear cleansing liquid too often can lead to bacterial growth and anear infection. Having avet-recommended ear cleaneron hand is a great way to help keep your dog’s ears clean and healthy. Making sure that a German Shepherd hasregular nail trimsis also important, unless their daily exercise routine wears the claws down naturally. When nails become overgrown, they are prone to breaking. Bringing home a German Shepherd puppy is a seven- to 10-year commitment, so make sure you can give this active and intelligent dog the home they need. Pet parents must dedicate time to socialization and consistent training throughout their dog's life, along with keeping up daily exercise, near-daily grooming, and annual wellness exams. No, German Shepherds are not consideredhypoallergenic dogs. Yes, German Shepherds are considered to be one of the smartest dog breeds. The average German Shepherd lifespan is 7–10 years. The price of a German Shepherd can range from $2,000–$4,000 from a reputable breeder. But you can also find adoptable German Shepherds and German Shepherd mixes through local shelters and rescues. The German Shepherd size varies by sex. Males stand 24–26 inches tall and weigh 65–90 pounds. Female German Shepherds are smaller, at 22–24 inches and 50–70 pounds. German Shepherds andBelgian Malinoislook similar, are working dogs, and are highly intelligent. But they are separate breeds, and there are manydifferences between German Shepherds and Belgian Malinois. Belgian Malinois are smaller (40–80 pounds), while the average German Shepherd weight is 50–90 pounds. German Shepherds also have longer fur and a stockier build than Belgians. WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Barri Morrison was born and raised and currently resides in Ft. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians