SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/general-health/food-allergies-vs-seasonal-allergies-dogs

alexei_tm/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images  Does your dogscratch,chew, or lick themselves excessively? If so, they may have allergies. Allergies in dogs most commonly cause itchy skin, ear infections, and paw licking, and they’re usually triggered by environmental allergens (like pollen), fleas, or certain foods. Treatment of dog allergies depends on the cause and often requires veterinary diagnosis and long-term management. In fact, allergies in dogs are one of the most common reasons for veterinary visits. Dogs with allergies have a hypersensitive immune system that gets triggered by certain substances (allergens). In dogs, allergies typically affect the skin and ears, rather than causing the respiratory symptoms commonly seen in people. Dogs with allergies often develop secondary bacterial or yeast infections from scratching. Symptoms will vary depending on the type of allergy your dog has, but may include: Itchy skin Excessive scratching or licking Face rubbing on floors or furniture Redor inflamed skin Hair loss Recurrentskinorear infections Gastrointestinal issues (vomitingorloose stools) specific to food allergy  There are several types of allergies in dogs. Below, we’ll take a closer look at each type of allergy in dogs and how it affects your pet. Environmental allergies, also known as atopic dermatitis, are caused by substances that exist in your home, backyard, and anywhere else your dog spends time. Common triggers for these allergic reactions include: Pollens Plant or animal fibers Dust mites Mold spores These allergens can be inhaled, as with pollen, or absorbed through the skin when your dog touches them. When environmental allergies occur seasonally, they are known asseasonal allergies. Other environmental allergies, like allergies to dust mites, may occur year-round. An allergy to fleas, calledflea allergy dermatitis, is the mostcommon skin diseasein dogs. The bite of just one or two fleas is enough to make affected dogs itch. Proteins in flea saliva are believed to be the allergens that cause the itchiness. With flea allergies, you may or may not seelive fleas on your dog. You may also notice black dots that look like coffee grounds at the base of your dog’s fur. These black dots areflea dirt, or flea excrement, and contain digested blood. Dogs candevelop an allergy to a particular foodat any age. Most commonly, the allergy is to a specific protein in the food, like chicken or beef. While allergies to grains or other ingredients can occur, they aren’t common. Treatment for allergies in dogs depends on the underlying cause. Your veterinarian may recommend anti-itch medications, flea medication, medicated baths, immunotherapy, or a prescription diet. Below are examples of how treatment varies based on the type of allergy. Treatments for environmental/seasonal allergies in dogs can include: Anti-itch medications: Your vet may prescribe oral or injectable medications to alleviate itchiness and manage itching during flare-ups. One such medication isZenrelia, which is a once-daily oral tablet designed specifically to control allergic itch in dogs over 12 months of age. Steroids: Steroids help reduce inflammation that drives itching but are not recommended for long-term use due to potential side effects. Medications to treat infections: Your vet may prescribe ear drops for bacterial or yeast ear infections, an antibiotic injection (Convenia) or oral antibiotics for bacterial skin infections, or antifungal medications for yeast infections. Immunotherapy: Customized allergy shots or oral drops formulated from allergy testing results may help gradually desensitize a dog to allergens over time. Supportive home care: Medicated baths, topical products (sprays, wipes, or mousse), and omega-3 fatty acid supplements may help soothe irritated skin and support skin health. If an allergy test has been performed, then the ideal allergy treatment for dogs is avoidance of the allergen. This is possible in a few, select circumstances, but most dogs are allergic to a variety of substances that can be difficult to avoid completely. Treatment for flea allergy dermatitis in dogs is twofold: Getting rid of the fleas Reducing the symptoms of itchy skin and irritation until the fleas are gone To eliminate fleas,strict flea controlis required. There are manyhighly effective flea control products and medicationsavailable, ranging from topical spot-on treatments, such asRevolutionorBravecto, to oral pills and chews, such asCredelio Quattro. If your dog needs rapid relief from live fleas,Capstar(nitenpyram), which starts working in 30 minutes, may be recommended. Consult with your veterinarian to determine your best option for your pup and their individual symptoms. Other animals in the home should also be treated for fleas. In severe cases, adog’s environment must be treated for fleasas well. Vacuum thoroughly to remove adult fleas, flea eggs, larvae, and pupae, and discard the vacuum bag immediately. Use insecticides that contain an insect growth regulator to treat allflea life stagesinside and outside your home. Anti-itch medications, either in an oral tablet or injection form, can provide symptomatic relief until the fleas are gone. To diagnose a food allergy in dogs, ahypoallergenic dog foodis recommended for eight to 12 weeks. During the feeding trial, dogs can't eat any other foods, including treats,human foods, or flavored medicines. This is the only way to determine if your dog has a food allergy. Hypoallergenic diets either have limited ingredients with an uncommon protein source or are processed in a special way (hydrolyzed) to be less likely to cause allergic reactions. The concept is that a dog can’t be allergic to a food that they have not been exposed to before. Over-the-counter foods are not recommended for a proper food trial. Consult your veterinarian when choosing the proper veterinary diet. If it’s determined that your pet has a food allergy, your veterinarian may recommend keeping your dog on the allergy diet long term. Other allergy treatments for dogs can be helpful when reducing the symptoms while waiting to see if the diet change is helpful. However, use of certain medications can interfere with food trials—it can be difficult to determine if improvement is due to the food or the medication. Always consult with your vet before giving your pup any medication. Common allergens include proteins in flea saliva; certain environmental allergens like dust, pollens, or molds; and specific ingredients in foods like chicken or beef. While some environmental allergies are seasonal, others—like dust mites and mold—can cause year-round symptoms. Flea allergies can occur any time fleas are present. Food allergies are also year-round, since the trigger ingredient is part of your dog’s regular diet. For environmental allergies, the best test is an intradermal allergen test (IDAT), which is a skin test. For food allergies, a strict dietary trial on a hypoallergenic food is the best test. Blood testsare not reliable for diagnosing allergies in dogs. If your dog has environmental allergies, you can help reduce incidence through home management, such as changing air filters, frequent vacuuming, and keeping windows closed. Some pet parents wipe their dog’s paws when they come in from being outside. However—in collaboration with your vet—it’s important to understand what your dog is allergic to so you can ensure you’re targeting the right allergen. Leigh Burkett was born and raised in Northeast Tennessee. She received her undergraduate degree in Biology from Wake Forest University. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians