SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/nutrition/are-you-feeding-your-dog-right-amount

SPONSORED BY Adobe_stock/Eva  Feeding the right amount of ahigh-quality dog foodis one of the simplest things you can do to help keep your dog healthy. Feed too much and you put your dog at risk forobesity. Feed too little and nutritional deficiencies are possible. If you’re wondering “how much food should I feed my dog?” you’re in the right place. Our dog feeding guide is here to help. SaveSave  Many factors play a role in how much you should feed your dog: Adog’s nutritional needscan vary as they get older or as their lifestyle or health status changes. It’s also important to remember that every dog and every situation is unique—what’s ideal for one dog may not work well for another. Determining how much food your dog should eat isn’t always easy, but lots of help is available. The best place to start is on thelabel of the dog foodthat your pet eats. Look at the packaging and you will find a feeding chart that provides recommendations tailored to that specific dog food. Acalorie calculatorcan also help, but the results are just an estimate. Your dog’s specific needs can be as much as 50% more or less than what is typical. Body condition scoringis a good way to fine-tune how much food to give your dog, and of course, always partner with your veterinarian. Healthy adult dogs are the easiest to feed. They’re done growing, so their nutritional needs should be fairly consistent over time—unless something big changes in their lives. The most important factor is their weight. Useyour dog’s ideal weightto figure out how much food to offer. This target weight goal may be lower than your dog’s actual weight if they’re overweight, or a little higher if they’re too thin. Get your dog weighed at their next vet appointment and keep track of their weight or opt for apet scaleto do it at home. Let’s look at an example of how much to feed your dog. Below is the feeding guide for thePurina Pro Plan Adult Shredded Blend Beef & Rice Formula Dry Dog Food. The food contains 382 calories (kcal) per cup, so the ranges would be similar for any adult dog food that has a similar calorie content: The food contains 379 calories (kcal) per cup, so the ranges would be similar for any adult dog food that has a similar calorie content:  Puppies are more complicated. In their early months, they require extra calories, protein, and other nutrients to fuel their growth. Largeandgiantdog breed puppies have different nutritional needs thansmall- andmedium-breed puppies, and they should be fed a large-breed puppy formula for proper bone and joint development. Talk to your vet about which formula is best for your puppy, how much to feed as they grow, and how long to feed the puppy formula. As they get closer to their full-grown size, a puppy’s nutritional needs become more like those of an adult dog. Also, feeding charts for puppy foods are typically based on your puppy's target adult weight. So look up how much your puppy will weigh as an adult and their current age to determine how much food to give your growing dog. (If you have a mixed breed dog, use adog DNA testto determine your dog’s breed and expected adult size. ) Let’s look atPurina Pro Plan Puppy Shredded Blend Chicken & Rice Formulaas an example. The feeding chart makes it easy to determine how much to feed your puppy as they get older:  Senior dogs are on the other end of the spectrum. Veterinarians usuallyconsider dogs to be seniorswhen they reach 7–12 years of age, depending on their size. A dog’s lifestyle and health status should also be considered. Senior dietsoften (but not always) have lower calorie counts than adult dog foods, to help prevent unhealthy weight gain as dogs become less active with age. The food may contain ingredients to support joint health or help manage other conditions that become more common as dogs get older. Your veterinarian can help you pick the right time to make the switch to a senior dog food. Let’s look atPurina Pro Plan Bright Mind Adult 7+ Chicken & Rice Formula Dry Dog Foodas an example. Below is its feeding guide:  You may have noticed that dog feeding guides tell you how much dog food to feed per day. But most dogs shouldn’t have just one meal a day, so you’ll have to divide the amount of food on the feeding chart by the number of meals your dog eats daily. To determine a dog feeding schedule, start with the below recommendations, which vary based on a dog’s size and age: Large and giant breeds: For puppies up to 4 months of age: three meals per day For adults and seniors: two to three meals per day Small and medium breeds: For puppies up to 4 months of age: three meals per day For adults and seniors: two meals per day Toy breeds: For puppies up to 4 months of age: four to five meals per day For puppies 4–6 months of age: three meals per day For dogs 6 months of age and older: two meals per day  Feeding dogs correctly matters! Underfeeding can lead to low energy levels, poor immune function, and other problems, but overfeeding is far more common. In fact, the Association for Pet Obesity Prevention estimates that59% of dogs are overweight or obese, which puts them at increased risk for health problems including: If your dog is overweight, an over-the-counter diet dog food such asPurina Pro Plan Adult Weight Management Shredded Blend Chicken & Rice Formula(330 kcal/cup) may help. Dogs who need to lose a lot of weight tend to do better on aveterinary diet weight loss food. Your vet will be able to help you choose the best course of action. While it requires some work to determine how much food to give your dog, your efforts will be rewarded with all the extra healthy years you get to spend with your fur friend. Generally, it is best to feed your dog twice a day, but how often to feed your dog varies based on your dog’s age, breed, size, and any underlying medical conditions. Check the label on your dog’s food for the feeding chart recommended by the pet food company for that specific dog food. You should also speak with your vet about how much to feed your dog. Your vet will make a specific nutrition plan considering your dog’s age, size, body condition, activity level, and health status. You’ll know you’re feeding your dog enough if they maintain a healthy weight with visible waistline, ribs that can be felt but not seen, steady energy, and firm stools. Use food label guidelines as a starting point, then adjust based on your vet’s advice. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians