SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/cavapoo

Kristen Seymour Adobe_stock/EllenMoran Equal parts cute, cuddly, and clever, the Cavapoo is a small (8–25 pound) crossbreed between theCavalier King Charles Spanieland aMiniature PoodleorToy Poodle. Cavapoos have a friendly, playful nature and tend to go with the flow when they get plenty of love and attention from their people. This makes them agood pick for many families, includingfirst-time pet parents. Thanks to their Poodle parentage, the coat of some Cavapoos may be low-shedding, which can make them a good option for people with allergies—if you’re willing to take on the responsibility of consistent grooming, that is. If you’re looking for a sociable, adaptable, adorable little friend, the Cavapoo may be perfect for you. Erin Askeland, CPDT-KA, CBCC-KA, andCamp Bow Wow'sanimal health and behavior consultant, describes the hybrid as gentle and even-keeled. “They aren’t lazy, but they are definitely one of the more low-keyPoodle mixesbecause Cavs are so gentle; they really get along with anyone, including people and animals,” Askeland says. “They can be really good for a first-time dog parent because they’re usually not too much for someone to handle. ” Askeland adds that Cavapoos generally do well withchildren who know how to play gently with dogs, are comfortable in homes fromtiny apartmentsto big houses with yards, and don’t require vigorous exercise. If you’re looking for a buddy to join you onlong runs, another breed would be a better fit. Cavapoo puppies and adults require regular grooming to keep their coats from becoming unruly. And because they love being with their people so much,separation anxietycan be an issue if not addressed early on. Cavapoos tend to be ahealthy breed, with a typical lifespan of 12–15 years. But that doesn’t mean they’re free from health concerns. “While it's true that hybrid dogs cansometimes have fewer health issues than their purebred parents, it's not a guarantee,” says Sabrina Kong, DVM, veterinarian at theJules Veterinary Centerin Northern California and a veterinary contributor at We Love Doodles. “In fact, hybrid dogs can still be prone to certain health issues that are common in both parent breeds, so it's crucial for pet parents to research the health issues that are common in both parent breeds before deciding on a hybrid dog breed. ” Hip dysplasiaoccurs in dogs when their hip joint doesn’t develop properly, leading to a loose joint that can then progress toarthritis, muscle atrophy, and limited mobility. Although this is more common inlarge dog breeds, hip dysplasia can be a problem in both Cavapoo parent breeds, so watch for signs of joint pain or reduced mobility. Your vet can advise you on whetherjoint supplements, pain medication, orsurgerymay be helpful. In manysmall dogs, including the Cavapoo,patellar luxationcan be an issue. This means their kneecap slides outside of its correct path, which may cause pain and, eventually, arthritis. Joint supplements can help in mild cases, andanti-inflammatory medicationsare also commonly used in treatment. For severe cases, surgery may be required. If you notice your pet limping, bunny hopping, or skipping, tell your veterinarian. Both parent breeds areprone to eye problems: Cavalier King Charles Spaniels can developentropion,corneal dystrophy,ingrown eyelashes,dry eye, retinal problems,cataracts, and more. Poodles can have issues withprogressive retinal atrophy, entropion,glaucoma, ingrown eyelashes, cataracts, and more. As a Cavalier-Poodle combo, eye health can be a concern for Cavapoo dogs. If you notice any abnormalities of the eyes, including poor vision,discharge,redness, or squinting, contact your veterinarian for an examination. Cavalier King Charles Spaniels have a hereditary link tosyringomyelia, or the development of fluid-filled cavities in the spinal cord. This condition is usually secondary toChiari-like malformation, which is abnormal formation of one of the skull bones. While Kong says it’s not common, it is possible for Cavapoos to develop this because they have Cavalier roots. Syringomyelia, or “neck scratcher’s disease,” causes abnormal sensations and pain. Symptoms can includesigns of discomfort, posture changes,a wobbly gait (ataxia), or scratching, rubbing, or pawing at affected areas. Your vet will rely on a physical exam, lab work, and diagnostic imaging to determine whether syringomyelia or CLM is the cause of your dog’s symptoms. If it is, they’ll talk to you aboutpain medications, whether surgery is an option, and if alternative treatments (such asacupuncture) could help. Some dogs live symptom-free for years, while others are severely impacted by pain. Like other small dogs, the Cavapoo is susceptible todental disease, which not only causesbad breath, but can also lead to painful infections, tooth loss, and even organ failure if left untreated. To help prevent this, bring your Cavapoo to the vet for regular checkups, have yourveterinarian perform a dental cleaningwhen recommended, and practicegood oral hygieneat home bytoothbrushing. However, be aware that your pup may still need a tooth (or more) pulled at some point. Mitral valve disease (MVD)is an inherited condition and a leading cause of death for the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Poodles are also at increased risk for MVD, so it’s important that pet parents work with reputable breeders when searching for a Cavapoo puppy “Responsible breeders should provide proof of the parent's heart health,” Kong says. “To prevent heart disease from spreading through breeding lines, Cavalier King Charles Spaniels [and Poodles] withheart murmursor diagnosed MVD should not be used for breeding. ” Thesymptoms of allergiesin Cavapoos can manifest in several ways, Kong says. This includes: Excessive itching and scratching Licking or biting their skin Red, inflamed skin Hair loss Repeated ear infections Hot spots Gastrointestinal problems Respiratory issues Treatment will depend on the cause and may include: Most allergies can be managed with appropriate medical treatment. “However, keep in mind that allergies may require lifelong management, and some dogs may be more prone to flare-ups or require ongoing medication,” Kong says. “Closely monitoring your Cavapoo for any signs of allergies and consulting your veterinarian promptly is the best way to go. ” Choose a commercially available food that complies with theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO)guidelines. However, if you notice changes in your Cavapoo’s skin, coat, waste, or behavior, a change of food may be in order. “Some Cavapoos may have allergies or sensitivities to certain ingredients, so you need to always be aware and observe any reactions they may have so you can adjust their diet accordingly,” Kong says. Talk to your veterinarian if you suspect their food may be causing your pup’s problems. And remember It’s always best to consult with your dog’s veterinarian before making any dietary changes. Feed your Cavapoo a measured amount of a life stage-appropriate (puppy,adult,senior) food. Cavapoo puppies need three to four small meals dailyon a consistent schedule,as this helps maintain blood sugar levels and preventhypoglycemia. Cavapoo adults can eat twice a day. And remember: This is a small dog, so even a couple of treats every day can significantly add to the calorie count!Dog treatsshould never make up more than 10% of your Cavapoo’s daily diet. Thelabel on your pup’s dog foodshould provide a starting point for how much to feed your Cavapoo, based on size. But chatting with your vet about other variables—like age, activity level, andcurrent body condition—will help determine whether your dog could use a little more (or less) kibble. Because the Cavapoo can experience hip dysplasia and patellar luxation, your vet may recommend food or treats with a joint supplement. However, many Cavapoos will receive all necessary nutrients from their food alone. Never give your dog a supplement without speaking to your vet first. If you have pets or other people at home, your Cavapoo will likely love them all. These happy little dogs are content to always be by your side, whether you’re out running errands or hanging out at home. “This is very, very much a flexible family dog,” Askeland says. That said, the Cavapoo’s people-centric personality can be a challenge for some pet parents. “Because they have such a strong attachment to their families, they may be a little more prone to exhibit signs of separation anxiety and get upset when their family leaves them, whether that just means they’re in another room and can’t get to them, or leave the house as a whole,” Askeland says. The potential for separation anxiety—which can lead to undesirable behaviors such aschewingorbarking—is the biggest consideration with this breed. Tohelp dogs with separation anxiety, give your Cavapoo amentally stimulating activitylike aKONG,lick mat, orpuzzle toywhenever they’re left alone. Increasing exercise andcrate training your Cavapoo puppycan also help dogs with mild anxiety. A comprehensive behavioral modification plan is usually necessary for severe cases of separation anxiety Otherwise, Cavapoos tend to be friendly, confident, and eager to please. With a bright mind and people-pleasing nature, the Cavapoo responds well topositive reinforcement training. Once they’ve mastered the basic cues, Cavapoos can really shine when learning tricks with their people, Askeland says. “Fun tricks involving them being close to you”—like teaching them to weave between your legs or jump through a hoop—"would be a fun activity and something they would likely thrive in,” she says. Learning tricks Obedience training Therapy dog work Neighborhood walks Food puzzles Fetch Cuddling at home “Cavapoos have a low-shedding coat that requires regular grooming toprevent matting and tangling,” Kong says. “Regular brushing,bathing, and trimming are all parts of grooming a Cavapoo. ” Additionally, says Kong, “Ear and eye cleaning are also crucial to prevent infections, as well ascleaning their teeth regularlyto prevent dental issues. ” Keep an eye on your Cavapoo’s skin for signs of allergies, such as recurring skin infections and itchiness. Talk to your vet right away if you notice redness, dryness, or increased scratching. Plan on brushing your Cavapoo about three times a week. Book a grooming appointment every six weeks—or learn how to use professional tools to keep that beautiful coat from tangling and causing painful mats. The best brush for your dog depends on the type of coat they inherit. A smallslicker brushworks well for Cavapoos with curlier, Poodle-like hair while apin brushis a good option for dogs with straighter hair. Cleaning your Cavapoo’s eyes isn’t only important in terms of preventing infection, but it’s also an opportunity to notice changes that could indicate an eye condition. Call your vet if you notice eye changes in your dog. Some Cavapoos might developtear stains; these can easily be wiped away with adog-safe eye cleaner. Clean your Cavapoo’s earswhen you groom them and keep an eye on their ears between cleanings. If they suffer from allergies, their ears could become itchy and infected. You might smell an infection, see debris in the ear canal, or notice yourdog shaking their heador scratching their ears. Many Cavapoos will need to have their nails trimmed every four to six weeks. Using anail clipperdesigned for small dogs or anadjustable nail grinderhelps make the task easier. As long as you’re prepared to provide your Cavapoo with lots of love, attention, and grooming, this is an adaptable dog that makes a wonderful addition to all kinds of families. Light to moderate exercise, paired with reward-based training and food puzzles to engage your Cavapoo’s bright mind, will go a long way toward keeping your pup happy in whatever home you have. Keep in mind, though, that no dog is truly hypoallergenic—Cavapoos included. “While they do have low-shedding coats, some may still produce allergens that can cause reactions in sensitive individuals,” Kong says. “Hybrid dogs can vary in their temperament, appearance, and health depending on the parent breeds. Research and understand the potential traits and health issues associated with both parent breeds before making the final decision on a hybrid dog breed. ” The Cavapoo is a relatively small breed that’s usually 8–25 pounds and 9–14 inches tall. The Poodle side of this mix can be a Miniature Poodle or Toy Poodle, which can affect the size of your full-grown Cavapoo. While the Cavapoo, like other Poodle mixes, is sometimesreferred to as hypoallergenic, no dog is truly allergen-free. Because they’re bred to have low-shedding coats, though, they may be a better option for people with allergies than a breed that sheds heavily. Thislittle dog has an impressive lifespanthat typically ranges 12–15 years. As a designer hybrid, the Cavapoo is not a purebred dog recognized by the American Kennel Club, and that can make it easy for disreputable breeders to get into the Cavapoo game. Reputable, professional Cavapoo breeders—who provide health guarantees based on recommended genetic testing—will likely charge $2,000–$4,000 for Cavapoo puppies, but that may fluctuate based on location and other factors. A Cavapoo is a cross between the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and Miniature Poodle or Toy Poodle. With a Cockapoo, that CKC Spaniel side is swapped out for aCocker Spaniel. It depends on what you consider “high maintenance. ” Cavapoo dogs require a lot of grooming compared to some other breeds, but their exercise needs are relatively low. They may also have more health problems than some other hybrid dogs. WRITTEN BY Kristen Seymour Freelance Writer Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians