SOURCE: https://www.petmd.com/dog/breeds/treeing-walker-coonhound

The Treeing Walker Coonhound is a high-energy, intelligent, and good-natured hound dog. Descended from theAmerican Foxhound, Treeing Walker Coonhounds have been bred since the mid-1700s to help hunters track and isolate game in the forest, most notably raccoons. A Virginian named Thomas Walker iscredited with the breed’s developmentin the Appalachian Mountains. They were recognized by the United Kennel Club (UKC) in 1945 and the American Kennel Club (AKC) in 2012. While primarily a working breed, the Treeing Walker Coonhound’s friendly disposition and trainability make them agood family dogin the right home. The Treeing Walker Coonhound is a medium to large hound that’s 20–25 inches tall at the shoulder and 50–70 pounds full grown. They have a short coat that’s easy to maintain and doesn’t require frequent grooming. As with any hound, attention should be given to their large, floppy ears to avoid ear infections. Coonhounds do best in an active household, though you’ll often find them napping on the couch. These muscular dogs are bred for endurance and need more than ashort walk every day. Take them with you on runs, hikes, or out hunting. Though smart and very trainable, Treeing Walker Coonhounds were bred to be independent workers and can have a strong will. Their loud voices mean you’ll be alerted to approaching mail carriers (or even passing neighborhood squirrels), though Coonhounds are usually friendly with people and other dogs when well-socialized. They will follow their strong nose and track quarry for long distances, so a fenced yard is preferable if you can’t monitor their exercise closely. The average Treeing Walker Coonhoundlifespan is 12–13 years, and they’re considered abreed with few genetic health concerns. That said, there are some conditions of which pet parents of any large hound should be aware. Hip dysplasiais a genetic disorder, usually found in large-breed dogs, where the hip socket forms abnormally and results in an unstable joint. This instability leads to abnormal movement of the joint, leading to scar tissue, inflammation, and pain. The most common symptom of hip dysplasia is pain in one or both hind limbs. This can be seen as limping, stiffness when getting up, or even just a change in how a dog walks or runs. Diagnosis of hip dysplasia requires X-ray imaging under sedation, and veterinarians can find evidence of dysplasia in dogs as young as 16 weeks. Most cases of hip dysplasia are treated medically by keeping dogs inslim body condition; usingjoint supplementsand laser therapy to protect joints; and givingpain medicationsand anti-inflammatories to keep dogs comfortable. Severe cases of hip dysplasia can benefit from surgery. The thyroid is a gland in the neck that produces hormones that control metabolism. Some dogs are genetically predisposed to produce antibodies against this gland (autoimmune thyroiditis), which destroys the gland and makes them unable to produce as much thyroid hormone. Clinical signs of thyroid disease in dogs include weight gain, hair loss, skin infections, and behavior changes. Rarely, dogs will present with neurologic signs, such as facial nerve paralysis and evenseizures. Thyroid disease is diagnosed with blood tests looking for thyroid hormone levels and antibody levels. Treatment is lifelong medication, which most dogs tolerate very well. Those floppy hound ears are prone to trapping moisture and debris, leading toear infections (otitis externa). Routinecleaning with a cotton balland apH-balanced cleanser meant for dog earscan reduce the risk of infections, which veterinarians often have to treat with topical medications. Frequent ear infections may also be asign of allergies. If routine cleaning is not preventing infections in your dog, discuss this with your vet. Companion Treeing Walker Coonhounds don’t have specific dietary requirements and can be fed anywell-balanced dog foodsapproved by theAssociation of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO). Working dogs may benefit from ahigher-calorie sport dietif they are not maintaining weight on a normal maintenance diet, though it’s rare that your Coonhound will need this. You may feedwet and/or dry foodaccording to your dog’s preference. This breed should have no issue eating two to three well-portioned meals per day. Treeing Walker Coonhoundpuppies need to eat more frequent meals—about three or four per day. Consider apuzzle feederfor these very intelligent dogs to keep them from getting bored. The amount to feed your Treeing Walker Coonhound depends on the brand and type of food you choose. Discuss your pup’s ideal calorie intake with your vet and monitor your dog’s weight and body condition. Don’t forget to account fortreats,dental chews, and training snacks in their total calorie count. Though a well-balanced maintenance diet should cover all of your Coonhound’s needs, very active dogs may benefit from joint support andomega-3 fatty acidsupplementation. Your veterinarian can help determine if any products would benefit your dog. Treeing Walker Coonhounds are generally even-tempered, trainable, happy companions. They are very people-oriented and known to be good with children and other dogs, especially when well-socialized and withproper introductions. Because of their long history ashunting dogs, they should beintroduced carefully to catsand other small animals because of theirprey drive. This breed may see smaller animals as something to chase. Treeing Walker Coonhounds are bred for hunting, and some of the traits that make them great hunting dogs may be unwanted in certain homes. Tracking raccoons through the woods requires endurance and athleticism, which means these dogs need plenty of exercise, with daily hour-long walks as a bare minimum. They are great partners forrunningandhikingmultiple times per week. Field trials are a great way to stimulate your coonhound’s natural desire to hunt and track, even if you aren’t a hunter yourself. Coonhounds are prized fortheir howling bark, or bay, which lets the hunter know they’ve cornered their quarry. Needless to say, neighbors in an apartment complex may not appreciate these vocal dogs. Treeing Walkers areintelligentand eager to please, though their exuberance may require extra patience. They are described as slow to mature, so that high-energy puppy stage may last until they are 2 years old (or even longer). Begin socializing your puppy early,  at 8–10 weeks, so they develop confidence in new situations. This, along with properpositive reinforcement training, will help you end up with a reliable companion. Field trials Water races Nite hunts Agility Hunting Treeing Walker Coonhounds have short, smooth, low-maintenance coats that do not require frequent grooming. Treeing Walkers do not have unique skin care needs. Contact your veterinarian if you notice changes in your dog’s skin. Treeing Walker Coonhounds have short and smooth haircoats that are low-maintenance. Bathing monthly(and also when they are dirty) with ashampoo made for dogsis sufficient for keeping your pup clean and healthy. Coonhounds are moderate shedders and benefit from weekly brushing. Treeing Walker Coonhounds do not have unique eye care needs. If you notice changes in your dog’s eyes, such ascloudiness,redness, ordischarge, call your vet. Treeing Walker Coonhounds have long, floppy ears and are more prone to ear infections than other dogs. Inspecting the ears frequently and cleaning them at least once a week with an appropriate ear cleaner is enough to prevent ear infections in dogs without allergies. If, despite routine ear cleanings, your Treeing Walker Coonhound keeps developing ear infections, talk to your vet about allergies your dog may have. Though bred primarily as a working dog, Treeing Walker Coonhounds can make excellent companions for a family with the time and space to give them the attention and exercise they need. Aside from routine ear cleanings, they require minimal maintenance and are not prone to many health issues. Even when well-trained, Treeing Walker Coonhounds are very vocal and not well-suited to having close neighbors, but they usually do well with children and other dogs. Be cautious when introducing them to smaller animals and cats, as they do like to chase them. After an active day, these hounds like nothing better than to curl up with their family and relax. Treeing Walker Coonhounds are playful, active dogs that require at least moderate exercise to stay happy and healthy. Most dogs of this breed will do best with regular activity that mimics the endurance running and tracking they were bred to perform, such as hiking or agility trials. Treeing Walker Coonhounds are social and most enjoy snuggling up with their favorite human after a day of activity. Treeing Walker Coonhounds are best known for their remarkable ability to quickly track hunting quarry, and for their unique, bugle-like bark that can carry for miles. Featured Image: Adobe/Mary Swift WRITTEN BY Veterinarian Dr. Jamie Lovejoy graduated from Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine in 2012 after an undergraduate degree in Marine Biology. Was this article helpful? Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians